New York/Albany
1
'Daddy, I'm tired,' the little girl in the red pants and the green blouse said fretfully. 'Can't 
you stop?'
    'Not yet, honey.'
    He was a big, broad-shouldered man in a worn and scuffed corduroy jacket and plain 
brown twill slacks. He and the little girl were holding hands and walking up Third
Avenue in New York City, walking fast, almost running. He looked back over his
shoulder and the green car was still there, crawling along slowly in the curbside lane.
    'Please, Daddy. Please.'
    He looked at her and saw how pale her face was. There were dark circles under her 
eyes. He picked her up and sat her in the crook of his arm, but he didn't know how long 
he could go on like that. He was tired, too, and Charlie was no lightweight anymore.
    It was five-thirty in the afternoon and  Third Avenue was clogged. They were crossing
streets in the upper Sixties now, and these cross streets were both darker and less
populated. . . . But that was what he was afraid of.
    They bumped into a lady pushing a walker full of groceries. 'Look where you're goin, 
whyn't ya?' she said, and was gone, swallowed in the hurrying crowds.
    His arm was getting tired, and he switched Charlie to the other one. He snatched
another look behind, and the green car was still there, still pacing them, about half  a
block behind. There were two men in the front seat and, he thought, a third in the back.
    What do I do now?
    He didn't know the answer to that. He was tired and scared and it was hard to think. 
They had caught him at a bad time, and the bastards probably knew it. What he wanted to 
do was just sit down on the dirty curbing and cry out his frustration and fear. But that was 
no answer. He was the grownup. He would have to think for both of them.    What do we do now?
    No money. That was maybe the biggest problem, after the fact of the men in green car. 
You couldn't do anything with no money in New York. People with no moneydisappeared in New York; they dropped into the sidewalks, never to be seen again.
    He looked back over his shoulder, saw the  green car was a little closer, and the sweat 
began to run down his back and his arms a little faster. If they knew as much as he
suspected they did — if they knew how little of the push he actually had left — they
might try to take him right here and now.  Never mind all the people, either. In New York, 
if it's not happening to you, you develop this funny blindness. Have they been charting
me? Andy wondered desperately. If they have, they know, and it's all over but the
shouting. If they had, they knew the  pattern. After Andy got some money, the strange
things stopped happening for a while. The things they were interested in.
    Keep walking.
Sho, boss. Yassuh, boss. Where?
    He had gone into the bank at noon because his radar had been alerted  — that funny 
hunch that they were getting close again. There was money in the bank, and he and
Charlie could run on it if they had to. And wasn't that funny? Andrew McGee no longer had an account at the Chemical Allied Bank of New York, not personal checking, not
business checking, not savings. They had all disappeared into thin air, and that was when
he knew they really meant to bring the hammer down this time. Had all of that really
been only five and a half hours ago?
    But maybe there was a tickle left. Just  one little tickle. It had been nearly a week since 
the last time — that presuicidal man at Confidence Associates who had come to the
regular Thursday night counseling session and then begun to talk with an eerie calmness
about how Hemingway had committed  suicide. And on the way out, his arm casually
around the presuicidal man's shoulders, Andy had given him a push. Now, bitterly, he
hoped it had been worth it. Because it looked very much as if he and Charlie were going 
to be the ones to pay. He almost hoped an echo —
    But no. He pushed that away, horrified and disgusted with himself. That was nothing
to wish on anybody.
    One little tickle; he prayed. That's all, God, just one little tickle. Enough to get me and 
Charlie out of this jam.
    And oh God, how you'll pay . . . plus the fact that you'll be dead for a month afterward, 
just like a radio with a blown tube. Maybe six weeks. Or maybe really dead with your 
worthless brains leaking out your ears. What would happen to Charlie then?
    They were coming up on Seventieth Street and the light was against them. Traffic was 
pouring across and pedestrians were building up at the corner in a bottleneck. And
suddenly he knew this was where the men in the green car would take them. Alive if they 
could, of course, but if it looked like trouble . . . well, they had probably been briefed on 
Charlie, too.
    Maybe they don't even want us alive anymore. Maybe they've decided just to maintain 
the status quo. What do you do with a faulty equation? Erase it from the board.
    A knife in the back, a silenced pistol, quite possibly something more arcane  — a drop 
of rare poison on the end of a needle. Convulsions at the corner of Third and Seventieth. 
Officer, this man appears to have suffered a heart attack.
    He would have to try for that tickle. There was just nothing else.    They reached the waiting pedestrians at the corner. Across the way, DON'T WALK
held steady and seemingly eternal. He looked back. The green car had stopped. The
curbside doors opened and two men in business suits got out. They were young and
smooth-cheeked. They looked considerably fresher than Andy McGee felt.    He began elbowing his way through the clog of pedestrians, eyes searching frantically
for a vacant cab.
    'Hey, man — '
    'For Christ' sake, fella!'
    'Please, mister, you're stepping on my dog — '
    'Excuse me . . . excuse me . . .' Andy said desperately. He searched for a cab. There 
were none. At any other time the street would have been stuffed with them. He could feel 
the men from the green car coming for them, wanting to lay hands on him and Charlie, to 
take them with them God knew where, the Shop, some damn place, or do something even 
worse —
    Charlie laid her head on his shoulder and yawned.
    Andy saw a vacant cab.
    'Taxi! Taxi!' he yelled, flagging madly with his free hand.    Behind him, the two man dropped all pretense and ran.
    The taxi pulled over.
    'Hold it!' one of the men yelled. 'Police! Police!'
    A woman near the back of the crowd at the corner screamed, and then they all began to 
scatter. 
    Andy opened the cab's back door and handed Charlie in. He dived in after her. 'La
Guardia, step on it,' he said.
    'Hold it, cabby. Police!'
    The cab driver turned his head toward the voice and Andy pushed  — very gently. A 
dagger of pain was planted squarely in the center of Andy's forehead and then quickly
withdrawn, leaving a vague locus of pain, like a morning headache — the kind you get 
from sleeping on your neck.
    'They're after that black guy in the checkered cap, I think,' he said to the cabby.
    'Right,' the driver said, and pulled serenely away from the curb. They moved down
East Seventieth.
    Andy looked back. The two men were standing alone at the curb. The rest of the
pedestrians  wanted nothing to do with them. One of the men took a walkie-talkie from his 
belt and began to speak into it. Then they were gone.
    'That black buy,' the driver said, 'whadde do? Rob a liquor store or somethin, you
think?'
    'I don't know,' Andy said, trying to think how to go on with this, how to get the most 
out of this cab driver for the least push. Had they got the cab's plate number? He would 
have to assume they had. But they wouldn't want to go to the city or state cops, and they 
would be surprised and scrambling, for a while at least.
    'They're all a bunch of junkies, the blacks in this city,' the driver said. 'Don't tell me, I'll 
tell you.'
    Charlie was going to sleep. Andy took off his corduroy jacket, folded it, and slipped it 
under her head. He had begun to feel a thin hope. If he could play this right, it might
work. Lady Luck had sent him what Andy thought of (with no prejudice at all) as a
pushover. He was the sort that seemed the easiest to push, right down the line: he was 
white (Orientals were the toughest, for some reason); he was quite young (old people
were nearly impossible) and of medium intelligence (bright people were the easiest
pushes, stupid ones harder, and with the mentally retarded it was impossible).
    'I've changed my mind,' Andy said. 'Take us to Albany, please.'
    'Where?' The driver stared at him in the rearview mirror. 'Man, I can't take a fare to 
Albany, you out of your mind?'
    Andy pulled his wallet, which contained a single dollar bill. He thanked God that this 
was not one of those cabs with a bulletproof partition and no way to contact the driver 
except through a money slot. Open contact always made it easier to push. He had been
unable to figure out if that was a psychological thing or not, and right now it was
immaterial.
    'I'm going to give you a five-hundred-dollar bill,' Andy said quietly, 'to take me and my 
daughter to Albany. Okay?'
    'Jeee-sus, mister — '
    Andy stuck the bill into the cabby's hand, and as the cabby looked down at it, Andy 
pushed . . . and pushed hard. For a terrible second he was afraid it wasn't going to work, that there was simply nothing left, that he had scraped the bottom of the barrel when he 
had made the driver see the non existent black man in the checkered cap.    Then the feeling came  — as always accompanied by that steel dagger of pain. At the 
same moment, his stomach seemed to take on weight and his bowels locked in sick,
griping agony. He put an unsteady hand to his face and wondered if he was going to
throw up  . . . or die. For that one moment he  wanted to die, as he always did when he 
overused it  — use it,  don't abuse it, the sign  — off slogan of some long ago disc jockey 
echoing sickly in his mind whatever 'it' was. If at that very moment someone had slipped 
a gun into his hand —
    Then he looked sideways at Charlie, Charlie sleeping, Charlie trusting him to get them 
out of this mess as he had all the others, Charlie confident he would be there when she 
woke up. Yes, all the messes, except it was all the same mess, the same fucking mess, 
and all they were doing was running again. Black despair pressed behind his eyes.
    The feeling passed . . . but not the headache. The headache would get worse and worse 
until it was a smashing weight, sending red pain through his head and neck with every
pulsebeat. Bright lights would make his eyes water helplessly and send darts of agony
into the flesh just behind his eyes. His sinuses would close and he would have to breathe 
through his mouth. Drill bits in his temples.  Small noises magnified, ordinary noises as
loud as jackhammers, loud noises insupportable. The headache would worsen until it felt 
as if his head were being crushed inside an inquisitor's lovecap. Then it would even off at 
that level for six hours, or eight, or, maybe ten. This time he didn't know. He had never 
pushed it so far when he was so close to drained. For whatever length of time he was in 
the grip of the headache, he would be next to helpless. Charlie would have to take care of 
him. God knew she had done it before . . . but they had been lucky. How many times 
could you be lucky?
    'Gee, mister, I don't know — '
    Which meant he thought it was law trouble.
    'The deal only goes as long as you don't mention it to my little girl,' Andy said. 'The 
last two weeks She's been with me. Has to be back with her mother tomorrow morning.'
    'Visitation rights,' the cabby said. 'I know all about it.'
    'You see, I was supposed to fly her up.'
    'To Albany? Probably Ozark, am I right?'
    'Right. Now,  the thing is, I'm scared to death of flying. I know how crazy that sounds, 
but it's true. Usually I drive her back up, but this time my ex  — wife started in on me, and 
. . . I don't know.' In truth Andy didn't. He had made up the story on the spur of the 
moment and now it seemed to be leaded straight down a blind alley. Most of it was pure 
exhaustion.
    'So I drop you at the old Albany airport, and as far as Moms knows, you flew, right?'
    'Sure.' His head was thudding.
    'Also, as far as Moms knows, you're no plucka-plucka-plucka, am I four-oh?'
    'Yes.' Plucka-plucka-plucka? What was that supposed to mean? The pain was getting
bad.
    'Five hundred bucks to skip a plane ride,' the driver mused.
    'It's worth it to me,' Andy said, and gave one last little shove. In a very quiet voice, 
speaking almost into the cabby's ear, he added, 'And it ought to be worth it to you.'
    'Listen,' the driver said in a dreamy voice. 'I ain't turning down no five hundred dollars. Don't tell me, I'll tell you.'
    'Okay,' Andy said, and settled back. The cab driver was satisfied. He wasn't wondering 
about Andy's half  — baked story. He wasn't wondering what a seven  — year old girl was 
doing visiting her father for two weeks in October with school in. He wasn't wondering 
about the fact that neither of them had so much as an overnight bag. He wasn't worried 
about anything. He had been pushed.
    Now Andy would go ahead  — and pay the price.
    He put a hand on Charlie's leg. She was fast asleep. They had been on the go all
afternoon  — ever since Andy got to her school and pulled her out of her second grade 
class with some half-remembered excuse . . . grandmother's very ill . . . called home . . . 
sorry to have to take her in the middle of the day. And beneath all that a great, swelling 
relief. How he had dreaded looking into Mrs. Mishkin's room and seeing Charlie's seat
empty, her books stacked neatly inside her desk.  No, Mr. McGee . . . she went with your 
friends about two hours ago . . . they had a note from you . .  . wasn't that all right?
Memories of Vicky coming back, the sudden terror of the empty house that day. His
crazy chase after Charlie. Because they had had her once before, oh yes.    But Charlie had been there. How close had it been? Had he beaten them by half an 
hour? Fifteen minutes? Less? He didn't like to think about it. He had got them a late
lunch at Nathan's and they had spent the rest of the afternoon just  going — Andy could 
admit to himself now that he had been in a state of blind panic  — riding subways, buses, 
but mostly just walking. And now she was worn out.
    He spared her a long, loving look. Her hair was shoulder length, perfect blond, and in 
her sleep she had a calm beauty. She looked so much like Vicky hat it hurt. He closed his 
own eyes.
    In the front seat, the cab driver looked wonderingly at the five-hundred-dollar bill the 
guy had handed him. He tucked it away in the special belt pocket where he kept all of his 
tips. He didn't think it was strange that this fellow in the back had been walking around 
New York with a little girl and a five-hundred-dollar bill in his pocket. He didn't wonder 
how he was going to square this with his dispatcher. All he thought of was how excited 
his girlfriend, Glyn, was going to be. Glynis kept tell telling him that driving a taxi was a 
dismal, unexciting job. Well, wait until she saw his dismal, unexciting five-hundreddollar bill.
    In the back seat, Andy sat with his head back and his eyes closed. The headache was 
coming, coming, as inexorable as a riderless black horse in a funeral cortege. He could 
hear the hoof beats of that horse in his temples: thud . . . thud . . . thud.
    On the run. He and Charlie. He was thirty-four years old and until last year he had 
been an instructor of English at Harrison State College in Ohio. Harrison was a sleepy
little college town. Good old Harrison, the very heart of mid-America. Good old Andrew 
McGee, fine, upstanding young man. Remember the riddle? Why is a farmer the pillar of
his community? Because he's always outstanding in his field.
    Thud, thud thud riderless black horse with red eyes coming down the halls of his mind, 
ironshod hooves digging up soft gray clods of brain tissue, leaving hoofprints to fill up
with mystic crescents of blood.
    The cabby had been a pushover. Sure. An outstanding cab driver.
    He dozed and saw Charlie's face. And Charlie's face became Vicky's face.
    Andy McGee and his wife, pretty Vicky. They had pulled her fingernails out, one byone. They had pulled out four of them  and then she had talked. That, at least, was his 
deduction. Thumb, index, second, ring. Then: Stop. I'll talk. I'll tell you anything you
want to know. Just stop the hurting. Please. So she had told. And then . . . perhaps it had 
been an accident . . . then his wife had died. Well, some things are bigger than both of us, 
and other things are bigger than all of us.
    Things like the Shop, for instance.
     Thud, thud thud riderless black horse coming on, coming on, and coming on: behold, a 
black horse.
    Andy slept.
    And remembered.
2
The man in charge of the experiment was Dr. Wanless. He was fat and balding and had at 
least one rather bizarre habit.
    'We're going to give each of you twelve young ladies and gentlemen an injection,' he
said, shredding a cigarette into the ashtray in front of him. His small pink fingers plucked 
at the thin cigarette paper, spilling out neat little cones of  golden-brown tobacco. 'Six of 
these injections will  be water. Six of them will be water mixed with a  tiny amount of a 
chemical compound which we call Lot Six. The exact nature of this compound is
classified, but it is essentially an hypnotic and mild hallucinogenic. Thus you understand
that the compound will be administered by the double-blind method . . . which is to say, 
neither you nor we will know who has gotten a clear dose and who has not until later. 
The dozen of you will be under close supervision for forty-eight hours following the
injection. Questions?'
    There were several, most having to do with the exact composition of Lot Six — that 
word  classified was like putting bloodhounds on a convict's trail. Wanless slipped these 
questions quite adroitly. No one had asked the question twenty-two-year-old Andy
McGee was most interested in. He considered raising his hand in the hiatus that fell upon 
the nearly deserted lecture hall in Harrison's combined Psychology/Sociology building
and asking, Say, why are you ripping up perfectly good cigarettes like that? Better not to. 
Better to let the imagination run on a free rein while this boredom went on. He was trying 
to give up smoking. The oral retentive smokes them; the anal retentive shreds them. (This 
brought a slight grin to Andy's lips, which he covered with a hand.) Wanless's brother had 
died of lung cancer and the doctor was symbolically venting his aggressions on the
cigarette industry. Or maybe it was just one of those flamboyant tics that college
professors felt compelled to flaunt rather than suppress. Andy had one English teacher his 
sophomore year at  Harrison (the man was now mercifully retired) who sniffed his tie
constantly while lecturing on William Dean Howells and the rise of realism.
    'If there are no more questions, I'll ask you to fill out these forms and will expect to see 
you promptly at nine next Tuesday.'
    Two grad assistants passed out photocopies with twenty-five ridiculous questions to
answer yes or no.  Have you ever undergone psychiatric counselling?  — No.8. Do you 
believe you have ever had an authentic psychic experience?  — No.14. Have you ever 
used hallucinogenic drugs?  — No.18. After a slight pause, Andy checked 'no' to that one, thinking, In this brave year 1969, who hasn't used them?
    He had been put on to this by Quincey Tremont, the fellow he had roomed with in
college.  Quincey knew that Andy's financial situation wasn't so hot. It was May of Andy's 
senior year; he was graduating fortieth in a class of five hundred and six, third in the
English program. But that didn't buy no potatoes, as he had told Quincey, who was a
psych major. Andy had a GA lined up for himself starting in the fall semester, along with
a scholarhip  — loan package that would be just about enough to buy groceries and keep 
him in the Harrison grad program. But all of that was fall, and in the meantime there was 
the summer hiatus. The best he had been able to line up so far was a responsible,
challenging position as an Arco gas jockey on the night shift.
    'How would you feel about a quick two hundred?' Quincey had asked.    Andy brushed long, dark hair away from his green eyes and grinned. 'Which men's
room do I set up my concession in?'
    'No, it's a psych experiment,' Quincey said. 'Being run by the Mad Doctor, though. Be 
warned.'
    'Who he?'
    'Him Wanless, Tonto. Heap big medicine man in — um Psych Department.'
    'Why do they call him the Mad Doctor?'
    'Well,' Quincey said, 'he's a rat man and a Skinner man both. A behaviorist. The
behaviorists are not exactly being overwhelmed with love these days.'
    'Oh,' Andy said, mystified.
    'Also, he wears very thick little rimless glasses, which makes him look quite a bit like 
the guy that shrank the people in Dr. Cyclops. You ever see that show?'    Andy, who was a late-show addict, had seen it, and felt on safer ground. But he wasn't 
sure he wanted to participate in any experiments run by a prof who was classified as a.) a 
rat man and b.) a Mad Doctor.
    'They're not trying to shrink people, are they?' he asked.
    Quincey had laughed heartily. 'No, that's strictly for the special-effects  people who
work on the B horror pictures,' he said. 'The Psych Department has been testing a series 
of low-grade hallucinogens. They're working with the U.S. Intelligence Service.'
    'CIA?' Andy asked.
    'Not CIA, DIA, or NSA,' Quincey said. 'Lower profile than any of them. Have you ever 
heard of an outfit called the Shop?'
    'Maybe in a Sunday supplement or something. I'm not sure.'
    Quincey lit his pipe. 'These things work in about the same way all across the board,' he 
said. 'Psychology, chemistry, physics, biology . . . even the sociology boys get some of
the folding green. Certain programs are subsidized by the government. Anything from the 
mating ritual of the tsetse fly to the possible disposal of used plutonium slugs. An outfit
like the Shop has to spend all of its yearly budget to justify a like amount the following
year.'
    'That shit troubles me mightily,' Andy said.
    'It troubles almost any thinking person,' Quincey said with a calm, untroubled smile.
'But the train just keeps rolling. What does our intelligence branch want with low-grade 
halucinogens? Who knows? Not me. Not you. Probably they don't either. But the reports 
look good in closed committees come budget-renewal time. They have their pets in every 
department. At Harrison, Wanless is their pet in the Psych Department'    'The administration doesn't mind?'
     'Don't be naive, my boy.' He had his pipe going to his satisfaction and was puffing
great stinking clouds of smoke out into the ratty apartment living room. His voice
accordingly became more rolling, more orotund, more Buckleyesque. 'What's good for
Wanless is good for the Harrison Psychology  Department, which next year will have its 
very own  building — no more slumming with those sociology types. And what's good 
for Psych is good for Harrison State College. And for Ohio. And all that blah-blah.'
    'Do you think it's safe?'
    'They don't test it on student volunteers if it isn't safe,' Quincey said. 'If they have even 
the slightest question, they test it on rats and then on convicts. You can be sure that what 
they're putting into you has been put into roughly three hundred people before you,
whose reactions have been carefully monitored.'
    'I don't like this business about the CIA — '
    'The Shop.'
    'What's  the difference?' Andy asked morosely. He looked at Quincey's poster of
Richard Nixon standing in front of a crunched  — up used car. Nixon was grinning, and a 
stubby V — for  — victory poked up out of each clenched fist. Andy could still hardly
believe the man had been elected president less than a year ago.
    'Well, I thought maybe you could use the two hundred dollars, that's all.'
    'Why are they paying so much?' Andy asked suspiciously.
    Quincey threw up his hands. 'Andy, it is the government's treat! Can't you follow that? 
Two years ago the Shop paid something like three hundred thousand dollars for a
feasibility study on a mass-produced exploding bicycle — and that was in the Sunday
Times. Just another Vietnam thing, I guess, although probably nobody knows for sure.
Like Fibber McGee used to say, `It seemed like a good idea at the time.´ ' Quincey
knocked out his pipe with quick, jittery movements. 'To guys like that, every college
campus in America is like one big Macy's. They buy a little here,  do a little windowshopping there. Now if you don't want It '
    'Well, maybe I do. Are you going in on it?'
    Quincey had smiled. His father ran a chain of extremely successful menswear stores in 
Ohio and Indiana. 'Don't need two hundred that bad,' he said. 'Besides, I hate needles.'
    'Oh.'
    'Look, I'm not trying to sell it, for Chrissakes; you just looked sort of hungry. The
chances are fifty-fifty you'll be in the control group, anyway. Two hundred bucks for
taking on water. Not even tapwater, mind you. Distilled water.'
    'You can fix it?'
     'I date one of Wanless's grad assistants,' Quincey said. 'They'll have maybe fifty
applicants, many of them brownnosers who want to make points with the Mad Doctor  —
'
    'I wish you'd stop calling him that.'
    'Wanless, then,' Quincey said, and laughed.
    'He'll see that the apple polishers are weeded out Personally. My girl will see that your 
applicant goes
    to his `in' basket. After that, dear man, you are on your own.'
     So he had made out the application when the notice for volunteers went up on the
Psych Department bulletin board. A week after turning it in, a young female GA(Quincey's girlfriend, for all Andy knew) had called on the phone to ask him some
questions. He told her that his parents were dead; that his blood type was O; that he had 
never participated in a Psychology Department experiment before; that he was indeed
currently enrolled in Harrison as an undergraduate, class of '69, in fact, and carrying more 
than the twelve credits needed to classify him as a full  — time student. And yes, he was 
past the age of twenty-one and legally able to enter into any and all covenants, public and 
private.
    A week later he had received a letter via campus mail telling him he had been accepted 
and asking for his signature on a release form. Please bring the signed form to Room 100, 
Jason Gearneigh Hall, on May the 6th.
    And here he was, release form passed in, the cigarette-shredding Wanless departed
(and he did indeed look a bit like the mad doctor in that Cyclops movie), answering
questions about his religious experiences along with eleven other undergrads. Did he
have epilepsy? No. His father had died suddenly of a heart attack when Andy was eleven. 
His mother had been killed in a car accident when Andy was seventeen — a nasty,
traumatic thing. His only close family connection was his mother's sister, Aunt Cora, and 
she was getting well along in years.
    He went down the column of questions, checking no, no, no. He checked only one
YES question: Have you ever suffered a fracture or serious sprain? If yes, specify. In the 
space provided, he scribbled the fact that he had broken his left ankle sliding into second 
base during a Little League game twelve years ago.  
    He went back over his answers, trailing lightly upward with the tip of his Bic. That was 
when someone tapped him on the shoulder and a girl's voice, sweet and slightly husky,
asked, 'Could I borrow that if you're done with it? Mine went dry.' 
    'Sure,' he said, turning to hand it to her. Pretty girl. Tall. Light-auburn hair,
marvelously clear complexion. Wearing a powder-blue sweater and a short skirt. Good
legs. No stockings. Casual appraisal of the future wife.
    He handed her his pen and she smiled her thanks.
    The  overhead lights made copper glints in her hair, which had been casually tied back 
with a wide white ribbon, as she bent over her form again.
    He took his form up to the GA at the front of the room. 'Thank you,' the GA said, as 
programmed as Robbie the  Robot. 'Room Seventy, Saturday morning, nine A.M. Please 
be on time.'
    'What's the countersign?' Andy whispered hoarsely.
    The grad assistant laughed politely.
    Andy left the lecture hall, started across the lobby toward the big double doors
(outside, the quad was green with approaching summer, students passing desultorily back 
and forth), and then remembered his pen. He almost let it go; it was only a nineteen cent 
Bic, and he still had his final round of prelims to study for. But the girl had been pretty, 
maybe worth chatting up, as the British said. He had no illusions about his looks or his 
line, which were both pretty nondescript, or about the girl's probable status (pinned or
engaged), but it was a nice day and he was feeling good. He decided to wait. At the very 
least, he would get another look at those legs.
    She came out three or four minutes later, a few notebooks and a text under her arm. 
She was very pretty indeed, and Andy decided her legs had been worth waiting for. They 
were more than good; they were spectacular.    'Oh, there you are,' she said, smiling.
    'Here I am,' said Andy McGee. 'What did you think of that?'
    'I don't know,' she said. 'My friend said these experiments go on all the time  — she was 
in one last semester with those J. B. Rhine ESP cards and got fifty dollars for it even
though she missed almost all of them. So I just thought  — ' She finished the thought with 
a shrug and flipped her coppery hair neatly back over her shoulders.
    'Yeah, me too,' he said, taking his pen back. 'Your friend in the Psych Department?'
    'Yes,' she said, 'and my boyfriend, too. He's in one of Dr. Wanless's classes, so he
couldn't get in. Conflict of interest or something.'
    Boyfriend. It stood to reason that a tall, auburn haired beauty like this had one. That 
was the way the world turned.
    'What about you?' she asked.
    'Same story. Friend in the Psych Department. I'm Andy, by the way. Andy McGee.'
    'I'm Vicky Tomlinson. And a little nervous about this, Andy McGee. What if I go on a 
bad trip or something?'
    'This sounds like pretty mild stuff to me. And even if it is acid, well . . . lab acid is 
different from the stuff you can pick up on the street, or so I've heard. Very smooth, very 
mellow, and administered under  very calm circumstances. They'll probably pipe in
Cream or Jefferson Airplane.' Andy grinned.
    'Do you know much about LSD?' she asked with a little cornerwise grin that he liked 
very much.
    'Very little,' he admitted. 'I tried it twice  — once two years ago, once last year. In some 
ways it made me feel better. It cleaned out my head . . . at least, that's what it felt like. 
Afterward, a lot of the old crud just seemed to be gone. But I wouldn't want to make a 
steady habit of it. I don't like feeling so out of control of myself. Can I buy you a Coke?'
    'All right,' she agreed, and they walked over to the Union building together.
    He ended up buying her two Cokes, and they spent the afternoon together. That
evening they had a few beers at the local  hangout. It turned out that she and the boyfriend 
had come to a parting of the ways, and she wasn't sure exactly how to handle it. He was 
beginning to think they were married, she told Andy; had absolutely forbidden her to take 
part in the Wanless experiment. For that precise reason she had gone ahead and signed 
the release form and was now determined to go through with it even though she was a 
little scared.
    'That Wanless really does look like a mad doctor,' she said, making rings on the table 
with her beer glass.
    'How did you like that trick with the cigarettes?'
    Vicky giggled. 'Weird way to quit smoking, huh?'
    He asked her if he could pick her up on the morning of the experiment, and she had 
agreed gratefully.
    'It would be good to go into this with a friend,' she said, and looked at him with her 
direct blue eyes. 'I really am a little scared, you know. George was so  — I don't know, 
adamant.'
    'Why? What did he say?'
    'That's just it,' Vicky said. 'He wouldn't tell me anything, except that he didn't trust
Wanless. He said hardly anyone in the department does, but a lot of them sign up for his 
tests because he's in charge of the graduate program. Besides, they know it's safe, because he just weeds them out again.'
    He reached across the table and touched her hand. 'We'll both probably get the distilled 
water, anyway,' he said. 'Take it easy, kiddo. Everything's fine.'
    But as it turned out, nothing was fine. Nothing.
3
Albany
    albany airport mister
    hey mister, this is it we're here.
    Hand, shaking him. Making his head roll on his neck. Terrible headache — Jesus!
Thudding, shooting pains.
    'Hey mister, this is the airport.'
    Andy opened his eyes, then shut them against the white light of an overhead sodium
lamp. There was a terrible, shrieking whine, building up and up and up, and he winced
against it. It felt as if steel darning needles were being jammed into his ears. Plane.
Taking off: It began to come to him through the red fog of pain. Ah yes, Doc, it all comes 
back to me now.
    'Mister?' The cabby sounded worried. 'Mister, you okay?'
    'Headache.' His voice seemed to come from far away, buried in the jet  — engine sound 
that was, mercifully, beginning to fade off. 'What time is it?'
    'Nearly midnight.  Slow haul getting up here. Don't tell me, I'll tell you. Buses won't be 
running, if that was your plan. Sure I can't take you home?'
    Andy groped in his mind for the story he had told the cabby. It was important that he 
remember, monster headache or not. Because of the echo. If he contradicted the earlier 
story in any way, it could set up a ricochet effect in the cabby's mind. It might die out  —
in fact, probably would — but it might not. The cabby might seize on one point of it,
develop a fixation on it; shortly it would be out of control, it would be all the cabby could 
think about; shortly after that, it would simply tear his mind apart. It had happened
before.
    'My car's in the lot,' he said. 'Everything is under control.'
    'Oh.' The cabby smiled, relieved. 'Glyn isn't gonna believe this, you know. Hey! Don't 
tell me, I'll t — '
    'Sure she'll believe it. You do, don't you?'
    The driver grinned widely. 'I got the big bill to prove it, mister. Thanks.'
    'Thank  you,' Andy said. Struggle to  be polite. Struggle to go on. For Charlie. If he had 
been alone, he would have killed himself long ago. A man wasn't meant to bear pain like 
this.
    'You sure you're okay, mister? You look awful white.'
    'I'm fine, thanks.' He began to shake Charlie.  'Hey, kid.' He was careful not to use her 
name. It probably didn't matter, but the caution came as naturally as breathing. 'Wake up, 
we're here.'
    Charlie muttered and tried to roll away from him.
    'Come on, doll. Wake up, hon.'
    Charlie's eyes fluttered open — the direct blue eyes she had got from her mother  —and she sat up, rubbing her face. 'Daddy? Where are we?'
    'Albany, hon. The airport.' And leaning closer, he muttered, 'Don't say anything yet.'
    ' Okay.' She smiled at the cab driver, and the cabby smiled back. She slipped out of the 
cab and Andy followed her, trying not to stagger.
    'Thanks again, man,' the cabby said. 'Listen, hey. Great fare. Don't tell me, I'll tell you.'
    Andy shook the outstretched hand. 'Take care.'
    'I will. Glyn's just not gonna believe this action.'
    The cabby got back in and pulled away from the yellow-painted curb. Another jet was 
taking of, the engine revving and revving until Andy felt as though his head would split
in two pieces and fall to the pavement like a hollow gourd. He staggered a little, and
Charlie put her hands on his arm.
    'Oh, Daddy,' she said, and her voice was far away.
    'Inside. I have to sit down.'
    They went in, the little girl in the red pants and the green blouse, the big man with the 
shaggy black hair and the slumped shoulders. A skycap watched them go and thought it 
was a pure sin, a big man like that out after midnight, drunk as a lord by the look of him, 
with his little girl who should have been in bed hours ago leading him around like a
Seeing Eye dog. Parents like that ought to be sterilized, the skycap thought.
    Then they went in through the electric-eye-controlled doors and the skycap forgot all
about them until some forty minutes later, when the green car  pulled up. to the curb and 
the two men got out to talk to him.
4
It was ten past midnight. The lobby of the terminal had been given over to the earlymorning people: servicemen at the end of their leaves, harried-looking women riding
herd on scratchy,  up-too-late children, businessmen with pouches of weariness under
their eyes, cruising kids in big boots and long hair, some of them with packs on their
backs, a couple with cased tennis rackets. The loudspeaker system announced arrivals
and departures and paged people like some omnipotent voice in a dream.    Andy and Charlie sat side by side at desks with TVs bolted to them. The TVs were 
scratched and dented and painted dead black. To Andy they looked like sinister, futuristic 
cobras. He plugged his last  two quarters into them so they wouldn't be asked to leave the 
seats. Charlie's was showing a rerun of  The Rookies and Johnny Carson was yucking it up 
with Sonny Bono and Buddy Hackett on Andy's.
    'Daddy, do I have to?' Charlie asked for a second time. She was on the verge of tears.
    'Honey, I'm used up,' he said. 'We have no money. We can't stay here.'
    'Those bad men are coming?' she asked, and her voice dropped to a whisper.
    'I don't know.' Thud, thud, thud in his brain. Not a riderless black horse anymore; now 
it was mailsacks filled with sharp scraps of iron being dropped on him from a fifth-story 
window. 'We have to assume they are.'
    'How could I get money?'
    He hesitated and then said, 'You know.'
    The tears began to come and trickled down her cheeks. 'It's not right. It's not right to 
steal.'    'I know it,' he said. 'But it's not right for them to keep coming at us, either. I explained 
it to you, Charlie. Or at least I tried.'
    'About little bad and big bad?'
    'Yes. Lesser and greater evil.'
    'Does your head really hurt?'
    'It's pretty bad,' Andy said. There was no use telling her that in an hour, or possibly
two, it would be so bad he would no longer be able to think coherently. No use
frightening her worse than she already was. No use telling her that he didn't think they
were going to get away this time.
     'I'll try,' she said, and got out of the chair. 'Poor Daddy,' she said, and kissed him.
    He closed his eyes. The TV played on in front of, him, a faraway babble of sound in 
the midst of the steadily growing ache in his head. When he opened his eyes again, she 
was just a distant figure, very small, dressed in red and green, like a Christmas ornament, 
bobbing away through the scattered people on the concourse.
    Please God, let her be all right, he thought. Don't let anyone mess with her, or scare 
her worse than she is already. Please and thank you, God Okay?
     He closed his eyes again.
5
Little girl in red stretch pants and a green rayon blouse. Shoulder-length blond hair. Up 
too late, apparently by herself. She was in one of the few places where a little girl by
herself could go unremarked after midnight. She passed people, but no one really saw
her. If she had been crying, a security guard might have  come over to ask her if she was 
lost, if she knew which airline her mommy and daddy were ticketed on, what their names 
were so they could be paged. But she wasn't crying, and she looked as if she knew where 
she was going.
    She didn't exactly  — but she had a pretty fair idea of what she was looking for. They 
needed money; that was what Daddy had said. The bad men were coming, and Daddy
was hurt. When he got hurt like this, it got hard for him to think. He had to lie down and 
have as much quiet as he could. He had to sleep until the pain went away. And the bad 
men might be coming . . . the men from the Shop, the men who wanted to pick them apart 
and see what made them work — and to see if they could be used, made to do things.
    She saw a paper shopping bag sticking out of the top of a trash basket and took it. A 
little way farther down the concourse she came to what she was looking for: a bank of
pay phones.
    Charlie stood looking at them, and she was afraid. She was afraid because Daddy had 
told her  again and again that she shouldn't do it . . . since earliest childhood it had been
the Bad Thing. She couldn't always control the Bad Thing. She might hurt herself, or
someone else, or lots of people. The time
    (oh mommy i'm sorry the hurt the bandages  the screams she screamed i made my 
mommy scream and i never will again . . . never . . . because it is a Bad Thing)
in the kitchen when she was little . . . but it hurt too much to think of that. It was a Bad 
Thing because when you let it go, it went . . . everywhere. And that was scary.
    There were other things. The push, for instance; that's what Daddy called it, the push. Only she could push a lot harder than Daddy, and she never got headaches afterward. But 
sometimes, afterward . . . there were fires.
    The word for the Bad Thing clanged in her mind as she stood nervously looking at the 
telephone booths: pyrokinesis 'Never mind that,' Daddy had told her when they were still 
in Port City and thinking like fools that they were safe. 'You're a firestarter, honey. Just 
one great big Zippo lighter.' And then it had seemed funny, she had giggled, but now it 
didn't seem funny at all.
    The other reason she wasn't supposed to push was because  they might find out. The 
bad men from the Shop. 'I don't know how much they know about you now,' Daddy had 
told her, 'but I don't want them to find out anymore. Your push isn't exactly like mine,
honey. You can't make people . . . well, change their minds, can you?'    'No-ooo . . .'
    'But you can make things move. And if they ever began to see a pattern, and connect 
that pattern with you, we'd be in even worse trouble than we are now.'    And it was stealing, and stealing was also a Bad Thing.
    Never mind. Daddy's head was hurting him and they had to get to a quiet, warm place 
before it got too bad for him to think at all. Charlie moved forward.
    There were about fifteen phonebooths in all, with circular sliding doors. When you
were inside the booth, it was like being inside a great big Contac capsule with a  phone 
inside it. Most of the booths were dark, Charlie saw as she drifted down past them. There 
was a fat lady in a pantsuit crammed into one of them, talking busily and smiling. And
three booths from the end a young man in a service uniform was sitting on the little stool 
with the door open and his legs poking out. He was talking fast.
    'Sally, look, I understand how you feel, but I can explain everything. Absolutely. I
know . . . I know . . . but if you'll just let me  — ' He looked up, saw the little girl looking 
at him, and yanked his legs in and pulled the circular door closed, all in one motion, like 
a turtle pulling into its shell. Having a fight with his girlfriend, Charlie thought. Probably
stood her up. I'd never let a guy stand me up.
    Echoing loudspeaker. Rat of fear in the back of her mind, gnawing. All the faces were 
strange faces.
    She felt lonely and very small, grief — sick over her mother even now. This was
stealing, but what did it matter? They had stolen her mother's life.
    She  slipped into the phonebooth on the end, shopping bag crackling. She took the
phone off the hook and pretended she was talking — hello, Grampa, yes, Daddy and I 
just got in, we're fine — and looked out through the glass to see if anyone was being
nosy. No  one was. The only person nearby was a black woman getting flight insurance 
from a machine, and her back was to Charlie.
    Charlie looked at the pay phone and suddenly shoved it.
    A little grunt of effort escaped her, and she bit down on her lower lip,  liking the way it 
squeezed under her teeth. No, there was no pain involved. It felt  good to shove things, 
and that was another thing that scared her. Suppose she got to like this dangerous thing?
    She shoved the pay phone again, very lightly, and suddenly a tide of silver poured out 
of the coin return. She tried to get her bag under it, but by the time she did, most of the 
quarters and nickels and dimes had spewed onto the floor. She bent over and swept as 
much as she could into the bag, glancing again and again out the window.    With the change picked up, she went on to the next booth. The serviceman was stilltalking on the next phone up the line. He had opened the door again and was smoking. 
'Sal, honest to Christ I did!
Just ask your brother if you don't believe me! He'll — '
    Charlie slipped the door shut, cutting off' the slightly whining sound of his voice. She
was only seven, but she knew a snowjob when she heard one. She looked at the phone, 
and a moment later it gave up its change. This time she had the bag positioned perfectly 
and the coins cascaded to the bottom with a musical little jingling sound.
    The serviceman was gone when she came out, and Charlie went into his booth. The
seat was still warm and the air smelled nastily of cigarette smoke in spite of the fan.
    The money rattled into her bag and she went on.
6
Eddie Delgardo sat in a hard plastic contour chair, looking ' up at the ceiling and
smoking. Bitch, he was thinking. She'll think twice about keeping her goddam legs closed 
next time. Eddie this and Eddie that and Eddie I never want to see you again and Eddie 
how could you be so  crew  — ool. But he had changed her mind about the old I-neverwant-to-see-you-again bit. He was on thirty-day leave and now he was going to New
York City, the Big Apple, to see the sights and tour the singles bars. And when he came 
back, Sally would be like a big ripe apple herself, ripe and ready to fall. None of that 
don't-you-have-any-respect-for-me stuff' went down with Eddie Delgardo of Marathon, 
Florida. Sally Bradford was going to put out, and if she really believed that crap about
him having had a vasectomy, it served her right. And then let her go running to her hick 
schoolteacher brother if she wanted to. Eddie Delgardo would be driving an army supply 
truck in West Berlin. He would be —
    Eddie's half resentful, half pleasant chain of daydreams was broken by a strange
feeling of warmth coming from his feet; it was as if the floor had suddenly heated up ten
degrees. And accompanying this  was a strange but not completely unfamiliar smell . . .
not something burning but . . . something singeing, maybe?
    He opened his eyes and the first thing he saw was that little girl who had been cruising 
around by the phonebooths, little girl seven or  eight years old, looking really ragged out. 
Now she was carrying a big paper bag, carrying it by the bottom as if it were full of
groceries or something.
    But his feet, that was the thing.
    They were no longer warm. They were hot.
    Eddie Delgardo looked down and screamed,
    'Godamighty Jeesus!'
    His shoes were on fire.
    Eddie leaped to his feet. Heads turned. Some woman saw what was happening and
yelled in alarm. Two security guards who had been noodling with an Allegheny Airlines
ticket clerk looked over to see what was going on.
    None of what meant doodly-squat to Eddie Delgardo. Thoughts of Sally Bradford and 
his revenge of love upon her were the furthest things from his mind. His army-issue shoes 
were burning merrily. The cuffs of his dress greens were catching. He was sprinting
across the concourse, trailing smoke, as if shot from a catapult. The women's room was closer, and Eddie, whose sense of self preservation was exquisitely defined, hit the door 
straight-arm and ran inside without a moment's hesitation.
    A young woman was coming out of one of the stalls, her skirt rucked up to her waist, 
adjusting her Underalls. She saw Eddie, the human torch, and let out a scream that the 
bathroom's tiled walls magnified enormously. There was  a babble of 'What was that?' and 
'What's going on?' from the few other occupied stalls. Eddie caught the paytoilet door
before it could swing back all the way and latch. He grabbed both sides of the stall at the 
top and hoisted himself feet first into the toilet. There was a hissing sound and a
remarkable billow of steam.
    The two security guards burst in.
    'Hold it, you in there!' one of them cried. He had drawn his gun. 'Come out of there 
with your hands laced on top of your head!'
    'You mind waiting until I put my feet out?' Eddie Delgardo snarled.7
Charlie was back. And she was crying again.
    'What happened, babe?'
    'I got the money but . . . it got away from me again, Daddy . . . there was a man . . . a 
soldier . . . I couldn't help it . . .'
    Andy felt the fear creep up on him. It was muted by the pain in his head and down the 
back of his neck, but it was there. 'Was . . . was there a fire, Charlie?'
    She couldn't speak, but nodded. Tears coursed down her cheeks.
    'Oh my God,' Andy whispered, and made himself get to his feet.
    That broke Charlie completely. She put her face in her hands and sobbed helplessly,
rocking back and forth.
    A knot of people had gathered around the door of the women's room. It had been
propped open, but Andy couldn't see . . . and then he could. The two security guards who 
had gone running down there were leading a tough-looking young man in an army
uniform out of the bathroom and toward the security office. The young man was jawing
at them loudly, and most of what he had to say was inventively profane. His uniform was 
mostly gone below the knees, and he was carrying two dripping, blackened things that
might once have been shoes. Then they were gone into the office, the door slamming
behind them. An excited babble of conversation swept the terminal.
    Andy sat down again and put his arm around Charlie. It was very hard to think now; 
his thoughts were tiny silver fish swimming around in a great black sea of throbbing pain. 
But he had to do the best he could. He needed Charlie if they were going to get out of 
this.
    'He's all right, Charlie. He's okay. They just took him down to the security office. Now, 
what happened?'
    Through diminishing tears, Charlie told him. Overhearing the soldier on  the phone.
Having a few random thoughts about him, a feeling that he was trying to trick the girl he 
was talking to. 'And then, when I was coming back to you, I saw him . . . and before I 
could stop it . . . it happened. It just got away. I could have hurt  him, Daddy. I could have 
hurt him bad. I set him on fire!'    'Keep your voice down,' he said. 'I want you to listen to me, Charlie. I think this is the 
most encouraging thing that's happened in some time.'
    'Y-you do?' She looked at him in frank surprise.
    'You say it got away from you,' Andy said, forcing the words. 'And it did. But not like 
before. It only got away a little bit. What happened was dangerous, honey, but . . . you
might have set his hair on fire. Or his face.'
    She winced away from that thought, horrified. Andy turned her face gently back to his.
    'It's a subconscious thing, and it always goes out at someone you don't like,' he said. 
'But . . . you didn't really hurt that guy, Charlie. You . . .' But the rest of it was gone and 
only the pain was left.
Was he still talking? For a moment he didn't even know.
    Charlie could still feel that thing, that Bad Thing, racing around in her head, wanting to 
get away again, to do something else. It was like a small, vicious, and rather stupid 
animal. You had to let it out of its cage to do something like getting money from the
phones . . . but it could do something else, something really bad.
    (like mommy in the kitchen oh mom i'm sorry)
    before you could get it back in again. But now it didn't matter. She wouldn't think
about it now, she wouldn't think about
    (the bandages my mommy has to wear bandages because i hurt her)
    any of it now. Her father was what mattered now. He was slumped over in his TV
chair, his face stamped with pain. He was paper white. His eyes were bloodshot.
    Oh, Daddy, she thought,  I'd trade even  — Steven with you if I could. You've got 
something that hurts you but it never gets out of its cage. I've got something that doesn't 
hurt me at all but oh sometimes I get so scared —
    'I've got the money,' she said. 'I didn't go to all the telephones, because the bag was 
getting heavy and I was afraid it would break.' She looked at him anxiously. 'Where can
you go, Daddy? You have to lie down.' .
    Andy reached into the bag and slowly began to transfer the change in handfuls to the 
pockets of his corduroy coat. He wondered if this night would ever end. He wanted to do 
nothing more than grab another cab and go into town and check them into the first hotel
or motel in sight . . . but he was afraid. Cabs could be traced. And he had a strong feeling 
that the people from the green car were still close behind.
    He tried to put together what he knew about the Albany airport. First of all, it was the 
Albany County Airport; it really wasn't in Albany at all but in the town of Colonie.
Shaker country — hadn't his grandfather told him once that this was Shaker country? Or 
had all of them died out now? What about highways? Turnpikes? The answer came
slowly. There was a road . . . some sort of Way. Northway or Southway, he thought.
    He opened his eyes and looked at Charlie. 'Can you walk aways, kiddo? Couple of
miles, maybe?'
    'Sure.' She had slept and felt relatively fresh. 'Can you?'
    That was the question. He didn't know. 'I'm going to try,' he said. 'I think we ought to 
walk out to the main road and try to catch a ride, hon.'
    'Hitchhike?' she asked.
    He nodded. 'Tracing a hitchhiker is pretty hard, Charlie. If we're lucky, we'll get a ride 
with someone who'll be in Buffalo by morning.' And if we're not, we'll still be standing in
the breakdown lane with our thumbs out when that green car comes rolling up.    'If you think it's okay,' Charlie said doubtfully.
    'Come on,' he said, 'help me.'
    Gigantic bolt of pain as he got to his feet. He swayed a little, closed his eyes, then
opened them again. People looked surreal. Colours seemed too bright. A woman walked 
by on high heels, and every click on the airport tiles was the sound of a vault door being
slammed.
    'Daddy, are you sure you can?' Her voice was small and very scared.    Charlie. Only Charlie looked right.
    'I think I can,' he said. 'Come on.'
    They left by a different door from the one they had entered, and the skycap who had 
noticed them getting out of the cab was busy unloading suitcases from the trunk of a car. 
He didn't see them go out.
    'Which way, Daddy?' Charlie asked.
    He looked both ways and saw the Northway, curving away below and to the right of 
the terminal building. How to get there, that was the question. There were roads
everywhere — overpasses, underpasses. NO RIGHT TURN, STOP ON SIGNAL, KEEP 
LEFT, NO PARKING ANYTIME. Traffic signals flashing in the early — morning
blackness like uneasy spirits.
    'This way, I think,' he said, and they walked the length of the terminal beside the feeder 
road that was lined with LOADING AND UNLOADING ONLY signs. The sidewalkended at the end of the terminal. A large silver Mercedes swept by them indifferently,
and the reflected glow of the overhead sodium arcs on its surface made him wince.
    Charlie was looking at him questioningly.
    Andy nodded. 'Just keep as far over to the side as you can. Are you cold?'
    'No, Daddy.'
    'Thank goodness it's a warm night. Your mother would — '
    His mouth snapped shut over that.
    The two of them walked off into darkness, the big man with the broad shoulders and 
the little girl in the red pants and the green blouse, holding his hand, almost seeming to
lead him.
8
The green car  showed up about fifteen minutes later and parked at the yellow curb. Two 
men got out, the same two who had chased Andy and Charlie to the cab back in
Manhattan. The driver sat behind the wheel.
    An airport cop strolled up. 'You can't park here, sir,' he said. 'If you'll just pull up to  —
'
    'Sure I can,' the driver said. He showed the cop his ID. The airport cop looked at it, 
looked at the driver, looked back at the picture on the ID.
    'Oh,' he said. 'I'm sorry, sir. Is it something we should know about?'
    'Nothing that affects airport security,' the driver said, 'but maybe you can help. Have
you seen either of these two people tonight?' He handed the airport cop a picture of Andy, 
and then a fuzzy picture of Charlie. Her hair had been longer then. In the snap, it was 
braided into pigtails. Her mother had been alive then. 'The girl's a year or so older now,' the driver said. 'Her hair's a bit shorter. About to her shoulders.'
    The cop examined the pictures carefully, shuffling them back and forth. 'You know, I 
believe I did see this little girl,' he said. 'Towhead, isn't she? Picture makes it a little hard 
to tell.'
    'Towhead, right.'
    'The man her father?'
    'Ask me no questions, I'll tell you no lies.'
    The airport cop felt a wave of dislike for the bland-faced young man behind the wheel 
of the nondescript green car. He had had peripheral doings with the FBI, the CIA, and the 
outfit they called the Shop before. Their agents were all the same, blankly arrogant and
patronizing. They regarded anyone in a bluesuit as a kiddy cop. But when they'd had the 
hijacking here five years ago, it had been the kiddy cops who got the guy, loaded down
with grenades, off the plane, and he had been in custody of the 'real' cops when he
committed suicide by opening up his carotid artery with his own fingernails. Nice going,
guys.
    'Look . . . sir. I asked if the man was her father to try and find out if there's a family 
resemblance. Those pictures make it a little hard to tell.'
    'They look a bit alike. Different hair colors.'
    That much 1 can see for myself, you asshole, the airport cop thought. 'I saw them both,' 
the cop told the driver of the green car. 'He's a big guy, bigger than he looks in that
picture. He looked sick or something.'
    'Did he?' The driver seemed pleased.
    'We've had a big night here, all told. Some fool also managed to light his own shoes on 
fire.'
    The driver sat bolt upright behind the wheel. 'Say what?'
    The airport cop nodded, happy to have got through the driver's bored façade. He would 
not have been so happy if the driver had told him he had just earned himself a debriefing 
in the Shop's Manhattan offices. And Eddie Delgardo probably would have beaten the
crap out of him, because instead of touring the singles bars (and the massage parlors, and 
the Times Square porno shops) during the Big Apple segment of his leave, he was going
to spend most of it in a drug-induced state of total recall, describing over and over again 
what had happened before and just after his shoes got hot.
9
The other two men from the green sedan were talking to airport personnel. One of them
discovered the skycap who had noticed Andy and Charlie getting out of the cab and
going into the terminal.
    'Sure I saw them. I thought it was a pure-d shame, a man as drunk as that having a little 
girl out that late.'
    'Maybe they took a plane,' one of the men suggested.
    'Maybe so,' the skycap agreed. 'I wonder what that child's mother can be thinking of. I 
wonder if she knows what's going on.'
    'I doubt if she does,' the man in the dark-blue Botany 500 suit said. He spoke with great 
sincerity. 'You didn't see them leave?'    'No, sir. Far as I know, they're still round here somewhere . . . unless their flight's been 
called, of course.'
10
The two men made a quick sweep through the main terminal and then through the
boarding gates, holding their IDs up in their cupped hands for the security cops to see. 
They met near the United Airlines ticket desk.
    'Dry,' the first said.
    'Think they took a plane?' the second asked. He was the fellow in the nice blue Botany 
500.
    'I don't think that bastard had more than fifty bucks to his name . . . maybe a whole lot 
less than that.'
    'We better check it.'
    'Yeah. But quick.'
    United Airlines. Allegheny. American. Braniff. The commuter airlines. No broadshouldered man who looked sick had bought tickets. The baggage handler at Albany
Airlines thought he had seen a little girl in red pants and a green shirt, though. Pretty
blond hair, shoulder-length.
    The two of them met again near the TV chairs where Andy and Charlie had been
sitting not long ago. 'What do you think?' the first asked.
    The agent in the Botany 500 looked excited. 'I think we ought to blanket the area,' he 
said. 'I think they're on foot.'
    They headed back to the green car, almost trotting.
11
Andy and Charlie walked on through the dark along the soft shoulder of the airport feeder 
road. An occasional car swept by them. It was almost one o'clock. A mile behind them, in 
the terminal, the two men had rejoined their third partner at the green car. Andy and
Charlie were now walking parallel to the Northway, which was to their right and below
them, lit by the depthless glare of sodium lights. It might be possible to scramble down
the embankment and try to thumb a ride in the breakdown lane, but if a cop came along, 
that would end whatever poor chance they still had to get away. Andy was wondering
how far they would have to walk before they came to a ramp. Each time his foot came 
down, it generated a thud that resounded sickly in his head.
    'Daddy? Are you still okay?'
    'So far, so good,' he said, but he was not so very
okay. He wasn't fooling himself, and he doubted if he was fooling Charlie.
    'How much further is it?'
    'Are you getting tired?'
    'Not yet . . . but Daddy . . .'
    He stopped and looked solemnly down at her. 'What is it, Charlie?'    'I feel like those bad men are around again,' she whispered.    'All right,' he said. 'I think we better just take a shortcut, honey. Can you get down that 
hill without falling?'
    She looked at the grade, which was covered with dead October grass.    'I guess so,' she said doubtfully.
    He stepped over the guardrail cables and then helped Charlie over. As it sometimes did 
in moments of extreme pain and stress, his mind attempted to flee into the past, to get
away from the stress. There had been some good years, some good times, before the
shadow began to steal gradually over their lives — first just  over him and Vicky, then
over all three, blotting out their happiness a little at a time, as inexorably as a lunar
eclipse. It had been —
    'Daddy!' Charlie called in sudden alarm. She had lost her footing. The dry grass was 
slippery, treacherous. Andy grabbed for her flailing arm, missed, and overbalanced
himself. The thud as he hit the ground caused such pain in his head that he cried out loud. 
Then they were both rolling and sliding down the embankment toward the Northway
where the cars rushed past, much too fast to stop if one of them — he or Charlie  —
should tumble out onto the pavement.
12
The GA looped a piece of rubber flex around Andy's arm just above the elbow and said, 
'Make a fist, please.' Andy did. The vein popped up obligingly. He looked away, feeling a 
little ill. Two hundred dollars or not, he had no urge to watch the IV set in place.
    Vicky Tomlinson was on the next cot, dressed in a sleeveless white blouse and dovegray slacks. She offered him a strained smile. He thought again what beautiful auburn
hair she had, how well it went with her direct blue eyes . . . then the prick of pain,
followed by dull heat, in his arm.
    'There,' the grad assistant said comfortingly.
    'There yourself,' Andy said. He was not comforted.
    They  were in Room 70 of Jason Gearneigh Hall, upstairs. A dozen cots had been
trucked in, courtesy of the college infirmary, and the twelve volunteers were lying
propped up on hypoallergenic foam pillows, earning their money. Dr. Wanless started
none of the IVs himself, but he was walking up and down between the cots with a word 
for everyone, and a little frosty smile.  We'll start to shrink anytime now, Andy thought 
morbidly.
    Wanless had made a brief speech when they were all assembled, and what he had said,
when boiled down, amounted to: Do not fear. You are wrapped snugly in the arms of 
Modern Science. Andy had no great faith in Modern Science, which had given the world 
the H — bomb, napalm and the laser rifle, along with the Salk vaccine and Clearasil.
    The grad assistant was doing something else now. Crimping the IV line.
    The IV drip was five percent dextrose in water, Wanless had said . . . what he called a 
D5W solution. Below the crimp, a small tip poked out of the IV line. If Andy got Lot Six, 
it would be administered by syringe through the tip. If he was in the control group, it
would be normal saline. Head or tails.
    He glanced over at Vicky again. 'How you doin, kid?'
    'Okay.'    Wanless had arrived. He stood between them, looking first at Vicky and then at Andy.
    'You feel some slight pain, yes?' He had no accent of any kind, least of all a regional 
— American one, but he constructed his sentences in a way Andy associated with
English learned as a second language.
    'Pressure,' Vicky said. 'Slight pressure.'
    'Yes? It will pass.' He smiled benevolently down at Andy. In his white lab coat he
seemed very tall. His glasses seemed very small. The small and the tall.    Andy said, 'When do we start to shrink?'
    Wanless continued to smile. 'Do you feel you will shrink?'
    'Shhhhrrrrrink,' Andy said, and grinned foolishly. Something was happening to him.
By God, he was getting high. He was getting off.
    'Everything will be fine,' Wanless said, and smiled more widely. He passed on. 
Horseman, pass by, Andy thought bemusedly. He looked over at Vicky again. How
bright her hair was! For some crazy reason it reminded him of the copper wire on the
armature of a new motor . . . generator . . . alternator . . . flibbertigibbet . . .
    He laughed aloud.
    Smiling slightly, as if sharing the joke, the grad assistant crimped the line and injected 
a little more of the hypo's contents into Andy's arm and strolled away again. Andy could 
look at the IV line now. It didn't bother him now.  I'm a pine tree, he thought.  See my 
beautiful needles. He laughed again.
    Vicky was smiling at him. God, she was beautiful. He wanted to tell her how beautiful 
she was, how her hair was like copper set aflame.
    'Thank you,' she said. 'What a nice compliment.' Had she said that? Or had he imagined 
it?
    Grasping the last shreds of his mind, he said, 'I think I crapped out on the distilled
water, Vicky.'
    She said placidly, 'Me too.'
    'Nice, isn't it?'
    'Nice,' she agreed dreamily.
    Somewhere  someone was crying. Babbling hysterically. The sound rose and fell in
interesting cycles. After what seemed like eons of contemplation, Andy turned his head
to see what was going on. It was interesting. Everything had become interesting.
Everything seemed to be in slow motion. Slomo, as the avant  — garde campus film critic 
always put it in his columns.  In this film, as in others, Antonioni achieves some of his 
most spectacular effects with his use of slomo footage. What an interesting, really clever 
word; it had the sound of a snake slipping out of a refrigerator: slomo.    Several of the grad assistants were running in slomo toward one of the cots that had 
been placed near Room 70's blackboard. The young fellow on the cot appeared to be
doing something to  his eyes. Yes, he was definitely doing something to his eyes, because 
his fingers were hooked into them and he seemed to be clawing his eyeballs out of his
head. His hands were hooked into claws, and blood was gushing from his eyes. It was 
gushing in slomo. The needle flapped from his arm in slomo. Wanless was running in
slomo. The eyes of the kid on the cot now looked like deflated poached eggs, Andy noted 
clinically. Yes indeedy.
    Then the white coats were all gathered around the cot, and you couldn't  see the kid 
anymore. Directly behind him, a chart hung down. It showed the quadrants of the humanbrain. Andy looked at this with great interest for a while.  Verrry in-der-rresting, as Arte 
Johnson said on Laugh-In.
    A bloody hand rose out of the huddle  of white coats, like the hand of a drowning man. 
The fingers were streaked with gore and shreds of tissue hung from them. The hand
smacked the chart, leaving a bloodstain in the shape of a large comma. The chart rattled 
up on its roller with a smacking sound.
    Then the cot was lifted (it was still impossible to see the boy who had clawed his eyes 
out) and carried briskly from the room.
    A few minutes (hours? days? years?) later, one of the grad assistants came over to
Andy's cot, examined his drip, and then injected some more Lot Six into Andy's mind.
    'How you feeling, guy?' the GA asked, but of course he wasn't a GA, he wasn't a
student; none of them were. For one thing, this guy looked about thirty-five, and that was 
a little long in the tooth for a graduate student. For another, this guy worked for the Shop. 
Andy suddenly knew it. It was absurd, but he knew it. And the man's name was . . .
    Andy groped for it, and he got it. The man's name was Ralph Baxter.    He smiled. Ralph Baxter. Good deal.
    'I feel okay,' he said. 'How's that other fella?'
    'What other fella's that, Andy?'
    'The one who clawed his eyes out,' Andy said serenely.
    Ralph Baxter smiled and patted Andy's hand. 'Pretty visual stuff', huh, guy?'
    'No, really,' Vicky said. 'I saw it, too.'
    'You think you did,' the GA who was not a GA said. 'You just shared the same illusion. 
There was a guy over there by the board who had a muscular reaction . . . something like 
a charley horse. No clawed eyes. No blood.'
    He started away again.
    Andy said, 'My man, it is impossible to share the same illusion without some prior
consultation.' He felt immensely clever. The logic was impeccable, inarguable. He had
old Ralph Baxter by the shorts.
    Ralph smiled back, undaunted. 'With this drug, it's very possible,' he said. 'I'll be back 
in a bit, okay?'
    'Okay, Ralph,' Andy said.
    Ralph paused and came back toward where Andy lay on his cot. He came back in
slomo. He looked thoughtfully down at Andy. Andy grinned back, a wide, foolish,
drugged-out grin. Got you there, Ralph old son. Got you right by the proverbial shorts.
Suddenly a wealth of information about Ralph Baxter flooded in on him, tons of stuff: he 
was thirty-five, he had been with the Shop for six years, before that he'd been with the 
FBI for two years, he had —
    He had killed four people during his career, three men and one woman. And he had 
raped the woman after she was dead. She had been an AP stringer and she had known 
about —
    That part wasn't clear. And it didn't matter. Suddenly Andy didn't want to know. The 
grin faded from his lips. Ralph Baxter was still looking down at him, and Andy was
swept by a black paranoia that he remembered from his two previous LSD trips . . . but 
this was deeper and much more frightening. He had no idea how he could know such
things about Ralph Baxter  — or how he had known his name at all  — but if he told Ralph 
that he knew, he was terribly afraid that he might disappear from Room 70 of JasonGearneigh with the same swiftness as the boy who had clawed his eyes out: Or maybe all 
of that really had been a hallucination; it didn't seem real at all now.    Ralph was still looking at him. Little by little he began to smile. 'See?' he said softly. 
'With Lot Six, all kinds of funky things happen.'
    He left. Andy let out a slow sigh of relief. He looked over at Vicky and she was
looking back at him, her eyes were wide and frightened.  She's getting your emotions,  he 
thought. Like a radio. Take it easy on her! Remember she's  tripping, whatever else this 
weird shit is!
    He smiled at her, and after a moment, Vicky smiled uncertainly back. She asked him 
what was wrong. He told her he didn't know, probably nothing.
    (but we're not talking — her mouth's not moving)
    (it's not?)
    (vicky? is that you)
    (is it telepathy, andy? is it?)
    He didn't know. It was something. He let his eyes slip closed.
    Are those really grad assistants? she asked him, troubled. They don't look the same. Is 
it the drug, Andy? I don't know, he said, eyes still closed. I don't know who they are. 
What happened to that boy? The one they took away? He opened his eyes again and
looked at her, but Vicky was shaking her head. She didn't remember. Andy was surprised 
and dismayed to find that he hardly remembered himself. It seemed to have happened
years ago. Got a charley horse, hadn't he, that guy? A muscular twitch, that's all. He —
    Clawed his eyes out.
    But what did it matter, really?
    Hand rising out of the huddle of white coats like the hand of a drowning man.
    But it happened a long time ago. Like in the twelfth century.
    Bloody hand. Striking the chart. The chart rattling up on its roller with a smacking 
sound.
    Better to drift. Vicky was looking troubled again.
    Suddenly music began to flood down from the speakers in the ceiling, and that was
nice . . . much nicer than thinking about charley horses and leaking eyeballs. The music 
was soft and yet majestic. Much later, Andy decided (in consultation with Vicky) that it 
had been Rachmaninoff. And ever after when he heard Rachmaninoff, it brought back
drifting, dreamy memories of that endless, timeless time in Room 70 of Jason Gearneigh
Hall.
    How much of it had been real, how much hallucination? Twelve years of off-and-on 
thought had not answered that question for Andy McGee. At one point, objects had
seemed to fly through the room as if an invisible wind were blowing — paper cups,
towels, a blood-pressure cuff, a deadly hail of pens and pencils. At another point,
sometime later (or had it really been earlier? there was just no linear sequence), one of
the test subjects had gone into a muscular seizure followed by cardiac arrest  — or so it 
had seemed. There had been frantic efforts to restore him using mouth-to-mouth 
resuscitation, followed by a shot of something directly into the chest cavity, and finally a 
machine that made a high whine and had two black cups attached to thick wires. Andy
seemed to remember one of the 'grad assistants' roaring, 'Zap him! Zap him! Oh, give
them to me, you fuckhead!'
    At another point he had slept, dozing in and out of a twilight consciousness. He spoke to Vicky and they told each other about themselves. Andy told her about the car accident 
that had taken his mother's life and how he had spent the next year with his aunt in a 
semi-nervous breakdown of grief. She told him that when she was seven, a teenage babysitter had assaulted her and now she was terribly afraid of sex, even more afraid that she 
might be frigid, it was that more than anything else that had forced her and her boyfriend 
to the breakup. He kept . . . pressing her.
    They told each other things that a man and a woman don't tell each other until they've 
known each other for years . . . things a man and a woman often never  tell, not even in 
the dark marriage bed after decades of being together.
    But did they speak?
    That Andy never knew.
    Time had stopped, but somehow it passed anyway.
13
He came out of the doze a little at a time. The Rachmaninoff was gone . . . if it had ever 
been there at all. Vicky was sleeping peacefully on the cot beside him, her hands folded 
between her breasts, the simple hands of a child who has fallen asleep while offering her 
bedtime prayers. Andy looked at her and was simply aware that at some point he had 
fallen in love with her. It was a deep and complete feeling, above (and below) question.
    After a while he looked around. Several of the cots were empty. There were maybe
five test subjects left in the room. Some were sleeping. One was sitting up on his cot and 
a grad assistant — a perfectly normal grad assistant of perhaps twenty-five  — was
questioning him and writing notes on a clipboard. The test subject apparently said
something funny, because both of them laughed in the low, considerate way you do when 
others around you are sleeping.
    Andy sat up and took inventory of himself. He felt fine. He tried a smile and found that 
it fit perfectly. His muscles lay peacefully against one another. He felt eager and fresh,
every perception sharply honed and somehow innocent. He could remember feeling this
way as a kid, waking up on Saturday morning, knowing his bike was heeled over on its 
kickstand in the garage, and feeling that the whole weekend stretched ahead of him like a 
carnival of dreams where every ride was free.
    One of the grad assistants came over and said, 'How you feeling, Andy?'
    Andy looked at him. This was the same guy that had injected him  — when? A year 
ago? He rubbed a palm over his cheek and heard the rasp of beard stubble. 'I feel like Rip 
van Winkle,' he said.
    The GA smiled. 'It's only been forty-eight hours, not twenty years. How do you feel, 
really?'
    'Fine.'
    'Normal?'
    'Whatever that word means, yes. Normal. Where's Ralph?'
    'Ralph?' The GA raised his eyebrows.
    'Yes, Ralph Baxter. About thirty-five. Big guy. Sandy hair.'
    The grad assistant smiled. 'You dreamed him up,' he said.
    Andy looked at the GA uncertainly. 'I did what?'    'Dreamed him up. Hallucinated him. The only Ralph I know who's involved in all the 
Lot Six tests in any way is a Dartan Pharmaceutical rep named Ralph Steinham. And he's 
fifty-five or so.'
    Andy looked at the GA for a long time without saying anything. Ralph an illusion?
Well, maybe so. It had all the paranoid elements of a dope dream, certainly; Andy
seemed to remember thinking Ralph was some sort of secret agent who had wasted all
sorts of people. He smiled a little. The GA smiled back . . . a little too readily, Andy
thought. Or was that paranoia, too? Surely it was.
    The guy who had been sitting up and talking when Andy woke up was now being
escorted from the room, drinking from a paper cup of orange juice.
    Cautiously, Andy said: 'No one got hurt, did they?'
    'Hurt?'
    'Well — no one had a convulsion, did they? Or — '
    The grad assistant leaned forward, looking concerned. 'Say, Andy, I hope you won't go 
spreading anything like that around campus. It would play bloody hell with Dr. Wanless's 
research program. We have Lots Seven and Eight coming up next semester, and — '
    'Was there anything?'
    'There was one boy who had a muscular reaction, minor but quite painful,' the GA said. 
'It passed in less than fifteen minutes with no harm done. But there's a witchhunt
atmosphere around here now. End the draft, ban ROTC, ban Dow Chemical job recruiters 
because they make napalm . . . Things get out of proportion, and I happen to think this is 
pretty important research.'
    'Who was the guy?'
    'Now you know I can't tell you that. All I am saying is please remember you were 
under the influence of a mild hallucinogenic. Don't go mixing up your drug-induced 
fantasies with reality and then start spreading the combination around.'    'Would I be allowed to do that?' Andy asked.
    The GA looked puzzled. 'I don't see how we could stop you. Any college experimental 
program is pretty much at the mercy of its volunteers. For a lousy two hundred bucks we 
can hardly expect you to sign an oath of allegiance, can we?'
    Andy felt relief. If this guy was lying, he was doing a really superlative job of it. It had 
all been a series of hallucinations. And on the cot beside his, Vicky was beginning to stir.
    'Now what about it?' the GA asked, smiling. 'I think I'm supposed to be asking the
questions.'
    And he did ask questions. By the time Andy finished answering them, Vicky was fully
awake, looking rested and calm and radiant, and smiling at him. The questions were
detailed. Many of them were the questions Andy himself would have asked.    So why did he have the feeling they were all window dressing?
14
Sitting on a couch in one of the smaller Union lounges that evening, Andy and Vicky
compared hallucinations.
    She had no memory of the thing that troubled him the most: that bloody hand waving 
limply above the knot of white tunics, striking the chart, and then disappearing. Andy had no recollection of the thing that was most vivid to her: a man with long blond hair had set 
up a folding table by her cot, so that it was just at her eye level. He had put a row of great 
big dominoes on the table and said, 'Knock them down, Vicky. Knock them all down.' 
And she had raised her hands to push them over, wanting to oblige, and the man had
gently but firmly pressed her hands back down on her chest. 'You don't need your hands, 
Vicky,' he had said. 'Just knock them down.' So she had looked at the dominoes and they 
had all fallen over, one after the other. A dozen or so in all.
    'It made me feel very tired,' she told Andy, smiling that small, slantwise smile of  hers. 
'And I had gotten this idea somehow that we were discussing Vietnam, you know. So I 
said something like, `Yes, that proves it, if South Vietnam goes, they all go.' And he
smiled and patted my hands and said, `Why don't you sleep for a while, Vicky? You must 
be tired.' So I did.' She shook her head., 'But now it doesn't seem real at all. I think I must 
have made it up entirely or built a hallucination around some perfectly normal test. You
don't remember seeing him, do you? Tall guy with shoulder-length blond hair and a little 
scar on his chin?'
    Andy shook his head.
    'But I still don't understand how we could share  any of the same fantasies,' Andy said, 
'unless they've developed a drug over there that's telepathic as well as an hallucinogenic. I 
know there's been some talk about that in the last few years . . . the idea seems to be that 
if hallucinogens can heighten perception . . .' He shrugged, then grinned. 'Carlos
Castaneda, where are you when we need you?'
    'Isn't it more likely that we just discussed the same fantasy and then forgot we did?' 
Vicky asked.
    He agreed it was a strong possibility, but he still felt disquieted by the whole
experience. It had been, as they say, a bummer.
    Taking his courage in his hands, he said, 'The only thing I really am sure of is that I 
seem to be falling in love with you, Vicky.'
    She smiled nervously and kissed the corner of his mouth. 'That's sweet, Andy, but'
    'But you're a little afraid of me. Of men in general, maybe.'
    'Maybe I am,' she said.
    'All I'm asking for is a chance.'
    'You'll have your chance,' she said. 'I like you, Andy. A lot. But please remember that I 
get scared. Sometimes I just . . . get scared.' She tried to shrug lightly, but it turned into 
something like a shudder.
    'I'll remember,' he said, and drew her into his arms and kissed her. There was a
moment's hesitation, and then she kissed back, holding his hands firmly in hers.
15
'Daddy!' Charlie screamed.
    The world revolved sickly in front of Andy's eyes. The sodium arc lamps lining the
Northway were below him, the ground was above him and shaking him loose. Then he
was on his butt, sliding down the lower half of the embankment like a kid on a slide.
Charlie was below him rolling helplessly over and over.
    Oh no, she's going to shoot right out into the traffic —    'Charlie!' he yelled hoarsely, hurting his throat, his head. 'Watch it!'    Then she was down, squatting in the breakdown lane, washed by the harsh lights of a 
passing car, sobbing. A moment later he landed beside her with a solid whap! that
rocketed all the way up his spine to his head. Things doubled in front of his eyes, tripled, 
and then gradually settled down.
    Charlie was sitting on her haunches, her head cradled in her arms.    'Charlie,' he said, touching her arm. 'It's all right, honey.'
    'I wish I did go in front of the cars!' she cried out, her voice bright and vicious with a 
self-loathing that made Andy's heart ache in his chest. 'I deserve to for setting that man on 
fire!'
    'Shhh,' he said. 'Charlie, you don't have to think of that anymore.'    He held her. The cars swashed by them. Any one of them could be a cop, and that 
would end it. At this point it would almost be a relief.
    Her sobs faded off little by little. Part of it, he realized, was simple tiredness. The same 
thing that was aggravating his headache past the screaming point and bringing this
unwelcome flood of memories. If they could only get somewhere and lie down. . . .
    'Can you get up, Charlie?'
    She got to her feet slowly, brushing the last of the tears away. Her face was a pallid 
moonlet in the dark. Looking at her, he felt a sharp lance of guilt. She should be snugly
tucked into a bed somewhere in a house with a shrinking mortgage, a teddy bear crooked 
under one arm, ready to go back to school the next morning and do battle for God,
country, and the second grade. Instead, she was standing in the breakdown lane of a
turnpike spur in upstate New York at one-fifteen in the morning, on the run, consumed 
with guilt because she had inherited something from her mother and father  — something
she herself had had no more part in determining than the direct blue of her eyes. How do 
you explain to a seven-year-old girl that Daddy and Mommy had once needed two 
hundred dollars and the people they had talked to said it was all right, but they had lied?
    'We're going to hook us a ride,' Andy said, and he couldn't tell if he had slung his arm 
around her shoulders to comfort her or to support himself. 'We'll get to a hotel or a motel 
and we'll sleep. Then we'll think about what to do next. That sound all right?'
    Charlie nodded listlessly.
    'Okay,' he said, and cocked his thumb. The cars rushed by it, unheeding, and less than 
two miles away the green car was on its way again. Andy knew nothing of this; his
harried mind had turned back to that night with Vicky in the Union. She was staying at 
one of the dorms and he had dropped her off there, relishing her lips again on the step just 
outside the big double doors, and she had put her arms hesitantly around his neck, this 
girl who had still been a virgin. They had been young, Jesus they had been young.
    The cars rushed by, Charlie's hair lifted and dropped in each backwash of air, and he 
remembered the rest of what had happened that night twelve years ago.
16
Andy started across campus after seeing Vicky into her dorm, headed for the highway
where he could hitch a ride into town. Although he could feel it only faintly against his
face, the May wind beat strongly through the elms lining the mall, as if an invisible river ran through the air just above him, a river from which he could detect only the faintest, 
farthest ripples.
    Jason Gearneigh Hall was on his way and he stopped in front of its dark bulk. Around 
it, the trees with their new foliage danced sinuously in the unseen current of that river of
wind. A cool chill wormed its way down his spine and then settled in his stomach,
freezing him lightly. He shivered even though the evening was warm. A big  silver-dollar 
moon rode between the growing rafts of clouds gilded keelboats running before the wind, 
running on that dark river of air. The moonlight reflected on the building's windows,
making them glare like blankly unpleasant eyes.
    Something happened in there, he thought.  Something more than what we were told or 
led to expect. What was it?
    In his mind's eye he saw that drowning, bloody hand again  — only this time he saw it 
striking the chart, leaving a bloodstain in the shape of a comma . . . and then the chart 
rolling up with a rattling, smacking sound.
    He walked toward the building. Crazy. They're not going to let you into a lecture hall 
at past ten o'clock. And —
    And I'm scared.
    Yes. That was it. Too many disquieting half memories. Too easy to persuade himself
they had only been fantasies; Vicky was already on her way to accomplishing that. A test 
subject clawing his eyes out. Someone screaming that she wished she were dead, that
being dead would be better than this, even if it meant going to hell and burning there for 
eternity. Someone else going into cardiac arrest and then being bundled out of sight with
chilling professionalism. Because, let's face it, Andy old kid, thinking about telepathy
doesn't scare you.
    What scares you is the thought that one of those things might have happened.
    Heels clicking, he walked up to the big double doors and tried them. Locked. Behind 
them he could see the empty lobby. Andy knocked, and when he saw someone coming
out of the shadows, he almost ran. He almost ran because the face that was going to
appear out of those swimming shadows would be the face of Ralph Baxter, or of a tall
man with shoulder-length blond hair and a scar on his chin.
    But it was neither; the man who came over to the lobby doors and unlocked them and 
stuck his querulous face out was a typical college security guard: about sixty — two,
lined cheeks and forehead, wary blue eyes that were rheumy from too much bottle time. 
A big time clock was clipped to his belt.
    'Building's closed!' he said.
    'I know,' Andy said, 'but I was part of an experiment in Room Seventy that finished up 
this morning and — '
    'That don't matter! Building closes at nine on week-nights! Come back tomorrow!'
    ' — and I think I left my watch in there,' Andy said. He didn't own a watch. 'Hey, what 
do you say? Just one quick look around.'
    'I can't do that,' the night man said, but all at once he sounded strangely unsure.
    With no thought at all about it one way or another, Andy said in  a low voice: 'Sure you 
can. I'll just take a look and then I'll be out of your way.
    You won't even remember I was here, right?' 
    A sudden weird feeling in his head: it was as if he had reached out, and  pushed this 
elderly night security man, only  with his head instead of his hands. And the guard didtake two or three uncertain steps backward, letting go of the door.
    Andy stepped in, a little concerned. There was a sudden sharp pain in his head, but it 
subsided to a low throb that was gone half an hour later.
    'Say, are you all right?' he asked the security man.
    'Huh? Sure, I'm okay.' The security man's suspicion was gone; he gave Andy a smile 
that was entirely friendly. 'Go on up and look for your watch, if you want to. Take your 
time. I probably won't even remember that you're here.'
    And he strolled off:
    Andy looked after him disbelievingly and then rubbed his forehead absently, as if to
soothe the mild ache there. What in God's name had he done to that old duck?  Something, 
that was for sure.
    He turned, went to the stairs, and began climbing them. The upper hall was deeply
shadowed and narrow; a nagging feeling of claustrophobia slipped around him and
seemed to tighten his breathing, like an invisible dog-collar. Up here, the building had
poked into that river of wind, and the air went skating under the eaves, screaming thinly. 
Room 70 had two double doors, the top halves two squares of frosted, pebbled glass.
Andy stood outside them, listening to the wind move through the old gutters and
downspouts, rattling the rusty leaves of dead years. His heart was thudding heavily in his 
chest.
    He almost walked away from it then; it seemed suddenly easier not to know, just to 
forget it. Then he reached out and grasped one of the doorknobs, telling himself there was 
nothing to worry about anyway because the damn room would be locked and good
riddance to it.
    Except that it wasn't. The knob turned freely. The door opened.
    The room was empty, lit only by stuttering moonlight through the moving branches of
the old elms outside. There was enough light for him to see that the cots had been
removed. The blackboard had been erased and washed. The chart was rolled up like a 
windowshade, only the pull ring dangling. Andy stepped toward it, and after a moment he 
reached up with a hand that trembled slightly and pulled it down.
    Quadrants of the brain; the human mind served up and marked like a butcher's
diagram. Just seeing it made him get that trippy feeling again, like an acid flash. Nothing 
fun about it; it was sickening, and a moan escaped his throat, as delicate as a silver strand 
of spiderweb.
    The bloodstain was there, comma-black in the moon's uneasy light. A printed legend
that had undoubtedly read  CORPUS CALLOSUM before this weekend's experiment now 
read COR OSUM, the comma-shaped stain intervening.
    Such a small thing.
    Such a huge thing.
    He stood in the dark, looking at it, starting to shake for real. How much of it did this 
make true? Some? Most? All? None of the above?
    From behind him he heard a sound, or thought he did: the stealthy squeak of a shoe.
    His hands jerked and one of them struck the chart with that same awful smacking
sound. It rattled back up on its roller, the sound dreadfully loud in this black pit of a 
room.
    A sudden knocking on the moonlight-dusted far window; a branch, or perhaps dead
fingers streaked with gore and tissue:  let me in I left my eyes in there oh let me in let me in —
    He whirled in a slow-motion dream, a  slomo dream, sinkingly sure that it would be that 
boy, a spirit in a white robe, dripping black holes where his eyes had been. His heart was 
a live thing in his throat.
    No one there.
    No thing there.
    But his nerve was broken and then the branch began its implacable knocking again, he 
fled, not bothering to close the classroom door behind him. He sprinted down the narrow 
corridor and suddenly footfalls were pursuing him, echoes of his own running feet. He
went down the stairs two at a time and so came back into the lobby, breathing hard, the 
blood hammering at his temples. The air in his throat prickled like cut hay.
    He didn't see the security man anywhere about.
    He left, shutting one of the big glass lobby doors behind him and slinking down the
walk to the quad like the fugitive he would later become.
17
Five days later, and much against her will, Andy dragged Vicky Tomlinson down to
Jason Gearneigh Hall. She had already decided she never wanted to think about the
experiment again. She had drawn her two-hundred-dollar check from the Psychology
Department, banked it, and wanted to forget where it had come from.
    He persuaded her to come, using eloquence he hadn't been aware he possessed. They 
went at the two-fifty change of classes; the bells of Harrison Chapel played a carillon in 
the dozing May air. 'Nothing can happen to us in broad daylight,' he said, uneasily
refusing to clarify, even in his own mind, exactly what he might be afraid of. 'Not with
dozens of people all around.'
    'I just don't want to go, Andy,' she had said, but she had gone.
    There were two or three kids leaving the lecture room with books under their arms.
Sunshine painted the windows a prosier hue than the diamond  — dust of moonlight Andy 
remembered. As Andy and Vicky entered, a few others trickled in for their three-o'clock 
biology seminar. One of them began to talk softly and earnestly to a pair of the others
about an end-ROTC march that was coming off that weekend. No one took the slightest 
notice of Andy and Vicky.
    'All right,' Andy said, and his voice was thick and nervous. 'See what you think.'
    He pulled the chart down by the dangling ring. They were looking at a naked man with 
his skin flayed away and his organs labeled. His muscles looked like interwoven skeins
of red yarn. Some wit had labeled him Oscar the Grouch.
    'Jesus!' Andy said.
    She gripped his arm and her hand was warm with nervous perspiration. 'Andy,' she
said. 'Please, let's go. Before someone recognizes us.'
    Yes, he was ready to go. The fact that the chart had been changed somehow scared him 
more than anything else. He jerked the pull ring down sharply and let it go. It made that 
same smacking sound as it went up.
    Different chart. Same sound. Twelve years later he could still hear the sound it made 
— when his aching head would let him. He never stepped into Room 70 of JasonGearneigh Hall after that day, but he was acquainted with that sound.
    He heard it frequently in his dreams . . . and saw that questing, drowning, bloodstained 
hand.
18
The green car whispered along the airport feeder road toward the Northway entrance
ramp. Behind the wheel, Norville Bates sat with his hands firmly at ten and two o'clock. 
Classical music came from the FM receiver in a muted, smooth flow. His hair was now 
short and combed back, but the small, semicircular scar on his chin hadn't changed  — the 
place where he had cut himself on a jagged piece of Coke bottle as a kid. Vicky, had she 
still been alive, would have recognized him.
    'We have one unit on the way,' the man in the Botany 500 suit said. His name was John 
Mayo. 'The guy's a stringer. He works for DIA as well as us.'
    'Just an ordinary whore,' the third man said, and all three of them laughed in a nervous, 
keyed up way. They knew they were  close; they could almost smell blood. The name of 
the third man was Orville Jamieson, but he preferred to be called OJ, or even better, The 
Juice. He signed all his office memos OJ. He had signed one The Juice and that bastard 
Cap had given him a reprimand. Not just an oral one; a written one that had gone in his 
record.
    'You think it's the Northway, huh?' OJ asked.
    Norville Bates shrugged. 'Either the Northway or they headed into Albany,' he said. 'I 
gave the local yokel the hotels in town because it's his town, right?'    'Right,' John Mayo said. He and Norville got along well together. They went back a
long way. All the way back to Room 70 of Jason Gearneigh Hall, and  that, my friend, 
should anyone ever ask you had been hairy. John never wanted to go through anything
that hairy again. He had been the man who zapped the kid who went into cardiac arrest. 
He had been a medic during the early days in Nam and he knew what to do with the 
defibrillator  — in theory, at least. In practice, it hadn't gone so well, and the kid had got 
away from them. Twelve kids got Lot Six that day. Two of them had died  — the kid who 
had gone into cardiac arrest and a girl who died six days later in her dorm, apparently of a 
sudden brain embolism. Two others had gone hopelessly insane  — one of them the boy 
who had blinded himself, the other a girl who later developed a total paralysis from the 
neck down. Wanless had said that was psychological, but who the fuck knew? It had been 
a nice day's work, all right.
    'The local yokel is taking his wife along,' Norville was saying. 'She's looking for her
granddaughter. Her son ran away with the little girl. Nasty divorce case, all of that. She 
doesn't want to notify the police unless she has to, but she's afraid the son might be going 
mental. If she plays it right, there isn't a night clerk in town that won't tell her if the two 
of them have checked in.'
    'If she plays it right,' OJ said. 'With these stringers you can never tell.'
    John said, 'We're going to the closest on-ramp, right?'
    'Right,' Norville said. 'Just three, four minutes now.'
    'Have they had enough time to get down there?'
    'They have if they were busting ass. Maybe we'll be able to pick them up trying tothumb a ride right there on the ramp. Or maybe they took a shortcut and went over the 
side into the breakdown lane. Either way, all we have to do is cruise along until we come 
to them.'
    'Where you headed, buddy, hop in,' The Juice said, and laughed. There was a .357
Magnum in a shoulder holster under his left arm. He called it The Windsucker.
    'If they already hooked them a ride, we're shit out of luck, Norv,' John said.
    Norville shrugged. 'Percentage play. It's quarter past one in the morning. With the
rationing, traffic's thinner than ever. What's Mr. Businessman going to think if he sees a 
big guy and a little girl trying to hitch a ride?'
    'He's gonna think it's bad news,' John said.
    'That's a big ten-four.'
    The Juice laughed again. Up ahead the stop-and-go light that marked the Northway 
ramp gleamed in the dark. OJ put his hand on the walnut stock of The Windsucker. Just 
in case.
19
The van passed them by, backwashing cool air . . . and then its brakelights flashed
brighter and it swerved over into the breakdown lane about fifty yards farther up.
    'Thank God,' Andy said softly. 'You let me do the talking, Charlie.'    'All right, Daddy.' She sounded apathetic. The dark circles were back under her eyes. 
The van was backing up as they walked toward it. Andy's head felt like a slowly swelling 
lead balloon.
    There was a vision from the Thousand and One Nights painted on the side  — caliphs, 
maidens hiding under gauzy masks, a carpet floating mystically in the air. The carpet was 
undoubtedly meant to be red, but in the light of turnpike sodiums it was the dark maroon 
of drying blood.
    Andy opened the passenger door and boosted Charlie up and in. He followed her.
'Thanks, mister,' he said. 'Saved our lives.'
    'My pleasure,' the driver said. 'Hi, little stranger.'
    'Hi,' Charlie said in a small voice.
    The driver checked the outside mirror, drove down the breakdown lane at a steadily
increasing pace, and then crossed into the travel lane. Glancing past Charlie's slightly
bowed head, Andy felt a touch of guilt: the driver was exactly the sort of young man
Andy himself always passed by when he saw him standing on the shoulder with his
thumb out. Big but lean, he wore a heavy black beard that curled down to his chest and a 
big felt hat that looked like a prop in a movie about feudin Kentucky hillbillies. A
cigarette that looked home rolled was cocked in the corner of his mouth, curling up
smoke. Just a cigarette, by the smell; no sweet odor of cannabis.
    'Where you headed, my man?' the driver asked.
    'Two towns up the line,' Andy said.
    'Hastings Glen?'
    'That's right.'
    The driver nodded. 'On the run from someone, I guess.'
    Charlie tensed and Andy put a soothing hand on her back and rubbed gently until she loosened up again. He had detected no menace in the driver's voice.
    'There was a process server at the airport,' he said.
    The driver grinned — it was almost hidden beneath his fierce beard — plucked the 
cigarette from his mouth, and offered it delicately to the wind sucking just outside his
half-open vent window. The slipstream gulped it down.
    'Something to do with the little stranger here is my guess,' he said.
    'Not far wrong,' Andy said.
    The driver fell silent. Andy settled back and tried to cope with his headache. It seemed 
to have  leveled off at a final screaming pitch. Had it ever been this bad before?
Impossible to tell. Each time he overdid it, it seemed like the worst ever. It would be a 
month before he dared use the push again. He knew that two towns up the line was not 
nearly  far enough, but it was all he could manage tonight. He was tipped over. Hastings 
Glen would have to do.
    'Who do you pick, man?' the driver asked him.
    'Huh?'
    'The Series. The San Diego Padres in the World Series — how do you figure that?'
    'Pretty far out,' Andy agreed. His voice came from far away, a tolling undersea bell.
    'You okay, man? You look pale.'
    'Headache,' Andy said. 'Migraine.'
    'Too much pressure,' the driver said. 'I can dig it. You staying at a hotel? You need 
some cash? I could let you have five. Wish it was more, but I'm on my way to California, 
and I got to watch it careful. Just like the Joads in The Grapes of Wrath.'
    Andy smiled gratefully. 'I think we're okay.'
    'Fine.' He glanced at Charlie, who had dozed off: 'Pretty little girl, my man. Are you
watching out for her?'
    'As best I can,' Andy said.
    'All right,' the driver said. 'That's the name of that tune.'
20
Hastings Glen was little more than a wide place in the road; at this hour all the traffic 
lights in town had turned to blinkers. The bearded driver in the hillbilly hat took them up 
the exit ramp, through the sleeping town, and down Route 40 to the Slumberland Motel, a 
redwood place with the skeletal remains of a harvested cornfield in back  and a pinkishred neon sign out front that stuttered the nonword VA A CY into the dark. As her sleep 
deepened, Charlie had tilted farther and farther to     the left, until her head was resting on 
the driver's blue-jeaned thigh. Andy had offered to shift her, and the driver shook his
head.
    'She's fine, man. Let her sleep.'
    'Would you mind dropping us off a little bit past?' Andy asked. It was hard to think, but 
this caution came almost intuitively.
    'Don't want the night man to know you don't have a car?' The driver smiled. 'Sure, 
man. But a place like that, they wouldn't give a squirt if you pedaled in on a unicycle.' 
The van's tires crunched the gravel shoulder. 'You positive you couldn't use five?'
    'I guess I could,' Andy said reluctantly. 'Would you write down your address for me? I'll mail it back to you.'
    The driver's grin reappeared. 'My address is `in transit,'' he said, getting out his wallet. 
'But you may see my happy smiling face again, right? Who knows. Grab onto Abe, man.' 
He handed the five to Andy and suddenly Andy was crying — not a lot, but crying.
    'No, man,' the driver said kindly. He touched the back of Andy's neck lightly. 'Life is 
short and pain is long and we were all put on this earth to help each other. The comicbook philosophy of Jim Paulson in a nutshell. Take good care of the little stranger.'
    'Sure,' Andy said, brushing his eyes. He put the five-dollar bill in the pocket of his
corduroy coat.
    'Charlie? Hon? Wake up. Just a little bit longer now.'
21
Three minutes later Charlie was leaning sleepily against him while he watched Jim
Paulson go up the road to a closed restaurant, turn around, and then head back past them 
toward the Interstate. Andy raised his hand. Paulson raised his in return. Old Ford van
with the Arabian Nights on the side, jinns and grand viziers and a mystic, floating carpet. 
Hope California's good to you, guy, Andy thought, and then the two of them walked back 
toward the Slumberland Motel.
    'I want you to wait for me outside and out of sight,' Andy said. 'Okay?'
    'Okay, Daddy.' Very sleepy.
    He left her by an evergreen shrub and walked over to the office and rang the night bell. 
After about two minutes, a middle-aged man in a bathrobe appeared, polishing his
glasses. He opened the door and let Andy in without a word.
    'I wonder if I could have the unit down on the end of the left wing,' Andy said. 'I
parked there.'
    'This time of year, you could have  all of the west wing if you wanted it,' the night man 
said, and smiled around a mouthful of yellow dentures. He gave Andy a printed index
card and a pen advertising business supplies. A car passed by outside, silent headlights
that waxed and waned.
    Andy signed the card Bruce Rozelle. Bruce was driving a 1978 Vega, New  York 
license LMS 240. He looked at the blank marked ORGANIZATION/ COMPANY for a 
moment, and then, in a flash of inspiration (as much as his aching head would allow), he 
wrote United Vending Company of America. And checked CASH under form ofpayment.
    Another car went by out front.
    The clerk initialed the card and tucked it away. 'That's seventeen dollars and fifty
cents.'
    'Do you mind change?' Andy asked. 'I never did get a chance to cash up, and I'm
dragging around twenty pounds of silver. I hate these country milk runs.'
    'Spends just as easy I don't mind.'
    'Thanks.' Andy reached into his coat pocket, pushed aside the five-dollar bill with his 
fingers, and brought out a fistful of quarters, nickels, and dimes. He counted out fourteen
dollars, brought out some more change, and made up the rest. The clerk had been
separating the coins into neat piles and now he swept them into the correct compartments of the cash drawer.
    'You know,' he said, closing the drawer and looking at Andy hopefully, 'I'd knock five 
bucks off your room bill if you could fix my cigarette machine. It's been out of order for a 
week.'
    Charlie walked over to the machine, which stood in the corner, pretended to look at it, 
and then walked back. 'Not our brand,' he said.
    'Oh. Shit. Okay. Goodnight, buddy. You'll find an extra blanket on the closet shelf if
you should want it.'
    'Fine.'
    He went out. The gravel crunched beneath his feet, hideously amplified in his ears,
sounding like stone cereal. He walked over to the evergreen shrub where he had left
Charlie and Charlie wasn't there.
    'Charlie?'
    No answer. He switched the room key on its long green plastic tab from one hand to 
the other. Both hands were suddenly sweaty.
    'Charlie?'
    Still no answer. He thought back and now it seemed to him that the car that had gone 
past when he had been filling out the registration card had been slowing down. Maybe it 
had been a green car.
    His heartbeat began to pick up, sending jolts of pain up to his skull.  He tried to think 
what he should do if Charlie was gone, but he couldn't think. His head hurt too badly. He 
—
    There was a low, snorting, snoring sound from deeper back in the bushes. A sound he 
knew very well. He leaped toward it, gravel spurting out from under his shoes. Stiff'
evergreen branches scraped his legs and raked back the tails of his corduroy jacket.
    Charlie was lying on her side on the verge of the motel lawn, knees drawn up nearly to 
her chin, hands between them. Fast asleep. Andy stood with his eyes closed for a moment 
and then shook her    awake for what he hoped would be the last time that night. That 
long, long night.
    Her eyelids fluttered, and then she was looking up at him. 'Daddy?' she asked, her
voice was blurred, still half in her dreams. 'I got out of sight like you said.'
    'I know, honey,' he said. 'I know you did. Come on. We're going to bed.'
22
Twenty minutes later they were both in the double bed of Unit 16, Charlie fast asleep and 
breathing evenly, Andy still  awake but drifting toward sleep, only the steady thump in his 
head still holding him up. And the questions.
    They had been on the run for about a year. It was almost impossible to believe, maybe 
because it hadn't seemed so much like running, not when they had been in Port City,
Pennsylvania, running the Weight-Off program. Charlie had gone to school in Port City,
and how could you be on the run if you were holding a job and your daughter was going 
to first grade? They had almost been caught in Port City, not because they had been
particularly good (although they were terribly dogged, and that frightened Andy a lot) but 
because Andy had made that crucial lapse — he had allowed himself temporarily toforget they were fugitives.
    No chance of that now.
    How close were they? Still back in New York? If only he could believe that  — they 
hadn't got the cabby's number; they were still tracking him down. More likely they were 
in Albany, crawling over the airport like maggots over a pile of meat scraps. Hastings 
Glen? Maybe by morning. But maybe not. Hastings Glen was fifteen miles from the
airport. No need to let paranoia sweep away good sense.
    I deserve it! I deserve to go in front of the cars for setting that man on fire!
    His own voice replying: It could have been worse. It could have been his face.
    Voices in a haunted room.
    Something else came to him. He was supposed to be driving a Vega. When morning
came and the night man didn't see a Vega parked in front of Unit 16, would he just
assume his United Vending Company man had pushed on? Or would he investigate?
Nothing he could do about it now. He was totally wasted.
    I thought there was something funny about him. He looked pale, sick. And he paid with 
change. He said he worked for a vending-machine company, but he couldn't fix the 
cigarette machine in the lobby.
    Voices in a haunted room.
    He shifted onto his side, listening to Charlie's slow, even breathing. He thought they
had taken her, but she'd only gone farther back in the bushes. Out of sight. Charlene 
Norma McGee, Charlie since . . . well, since forever.  If they took you, Charlie, I don't 
know what I'd do.
23
One last voice, his roommate Quincey's voice, from six years ago.
    Charlie had been a year old then, and of course they knew she wasn't normal. They had 
known that since she was a week old and Vicky had brought her into their bed with them 
because when she was left in the little crib, the pillow began to . . . well, began to
smolder. The night they had put the crib away forever, not speaking in their fright, a
fright too big and too strange to be articulated, it had got hot enough to blister her cheek 
and she had screamed most of the night, in spite of the Solarcaine Andy had found in the 
medicine chest. What a crazyhouse that first year had been, no sleep, endless fear. Fires 
in the wastebaskets when her bottles were late; once the curtains had burst into flame, and 
if Vicky hadn't been in the room —
    It was her fall down the stairs that had finally prompted him to call Quincey. She had 
been crawling then, and was quite good at going up the stairs on her hands and knees and 
then backing down again the same way. Andy had been sitting with her that day; Vicky
was out at Senter's with one of her friends, shopping. She had been hesitant about going, 
and Andy nearly had to throw her out the door. She was looking too used lately, too tired. 
There was something starey in her eyes that made him think about those combat —
fatigue stories you heard during wartime.
    He had been reading in the living room, near the foot of the stairs. Charlie was going
up and down. Sitting on the stairs was a teddy bear. He should have moved it, of course, 
but each time she went up, Charlie went around it, and he had become lulled  — much as he had become lulled by what appeared to be their normal life in Port City.
    As she came down the third time, her feet got tangled around the bear and she came all 
the way to the bottom, thump, bump, and tumble, wailing with rage and fear. The stairs 
were carpeted and she didn't even have a bruise  — God watches over drunks and small 
children, that had been Quincey's saying, and that was his first conscious thought of
Quincey that day — but Andy rushed to her, picked her up, held her, cooed a lot of
nonsense  to her while he gave her the quick once-over, looking for blood, or a limb
hanging wrong, signs of concussion. And —
    And he felt it pass him — the invisible, incredible bolt of death from his daughter's
mind. It felt like the backwash of warm air from a highballing subway train, when it's
summertime and you're standing maybe a little too close on the platform. A soft,
soundless passage of warm air . . . and then the teddy bear was on fire. Teddy had hurt 
Charlie; Charlie would hurt Teddy. The flames roared up, and for a moment, as it
charred, Andy was looking at its black shoebutton eyes through a sheet of flame, and the 
flames were spreading to the carpeting on the stair where the bear had tumbled.
    Andy put his daughter down and ran for the fire extinguisher on the wall near the TV. 
He and Vicky didn't talk about the thing their daughter could do — there were times 
when Andy wanted to, but Vicky wouldn't hear of it; she avoided the subject with
hysterical stubbornness, saying there was nothing wrong with Charlie,  nothing wrong —
but fire extinguishers had appeared silently, undiscussed, with almost the same stealth as
dandelions appear during that period when spring and summer overlap. They didn't talk
about what Charlie could do, but there were fire extinguishers all over the house.
    He grabbed this one, smelling the heavy aroma of frying carpet, and dashed for the
stairs . . . and still there was time to think about that story, the one he had read as a kid, 
'It's a  Good Life,' by some guy named Jerome Bixby, and that had been about a little kid 
who had enslaved his parents with psychic terror, a nightmare of a thousand possible
deaths, and you never knew . . . you never knew when the little kid was going to get mad 
. . .
    Charlie was wailing, sitting on her butt at the foot of the stairs.    Andy twisted the knob on the fire extinguisher savagely and sprayed foam on the
spreading fire, dousing it. He picked up Teddy, his fur stippled with dots and puffs and 
dollops of foam, and carried him back downstairs.
    Hating himself, yet knowing in some primitive way that it had to be done, the line had 
to be drawn, the lesson learned, he jammed the bear almost into Charlie's screaming,
frightened, tear-streaked face. Oh you dirty bastard, he had thought desperately, why 
don't you just go out to the kitchen and get a paring knife and cut a line up each cheek? 
Mark her that way? And his mind had seized on that. Scars. Yes. That's what he had to 
do. Scar his child. Burn a scar on her soul.
    'Do you like  the way Teddy looks?' he roared. The bear was scalded, the bear was 
blackened, and in his hand it was still as warm as a cooling lump of charcoal. 'Do you
like Teddy to be all burned so you can't play with him anymore, Charlie?'
    Charlie was crying in great, braying whoops, her skin all red fever and pale death, her 
eyes swimming with tears. 'Daaaaa! Ted! Ted!'
    'Yes, Teddy,' he said grimly. 'Teddy's all burned, Charlie. You burned Teddy. And if
you burn Teddy, you might burn Mommy. Daddy. Now . . .  don't you do it anymore!' He 
leaned closer to her, not picking her up yet, not touching her. 'Don't you do it anymore because it is a Bad Thing!'
    'Daaaaaaaaaa — '
    And that was all the heartbreak he could stand to inflict, all the horror, all the fear. He 
picked her up, held her, walked her back and forth until  — a very long time later  — her 
sobs tapered off to irregular hitchings of her chest, and sniffles. When he looked at her, 
she was asleep with her cheek on his shoulder.
    He put her on the couch and went to the phone in the kitchen and called Quincey.
    Quincey didn't want to talk. He was working for a large aircraft corporation in that
year of 1975, and in the notes that accompanied each of his yearly Christmas cards to the 
McGees he described his job as Vice-President in Charge of Stroking. When the men
who made the airplanes had problems, they were supposed to go see Quincey. Quincey
would help them with their problems  — feelings of alienation, identity crises, maybe just 
a feeling that their jobs were dehumanizing them  — and they wouldn't go back to the line 
and put the widget where the wadget was supposed to go and therefore the planes
wouldn't crash and the world would continue to be safe for democracy. For this Quincey
made thirty-two thousand dollars a year, seventeen thousand more than Andy made. 'And 
I don't feel a bit guilty,' he had written. 'I consider it a small salary to extract for keeping 
America afloat almost single-handed.'
    That was Quincey, as sardonically funny as ever. Except he hadn't been sardonic and 
he hadn't been funny that day when Andy called from Ohio with his daughter sleeping on
the couch and the smell of burned bear and singed carpeting in his nostrils:
    'I've heard things,' Quincey said finally, when he saw that Andy wasn't going to let him 
off without  something. 'But sometimes people listen in on phones, old buddy. It's the era 
of Watergate.'
    'I'm scared,' Andy said. 'Vicky's scared. And Charlie's scared too. What have you
heard, Quincey?'
    'Once  upon a time there was an experiment in which twelve people participated,'
Quincey said. 'About six years ago. Do you remember that?'
    'I remember it,' Andy said grimly.
    'There aren't many of those twelve people left. There were four, the last I heard. And 
two of them married each other.'
    'Yes,' Andy said, but inside he felt growing horror. Only four left? What was Quincey 
talking about?
    'I understand one of them can bend keys and shut doors without even touching them.' 
Quincey's voice, thin,  coming across two thousand miles of telephone cable, coming
through switching stations, through the open-relay points, through junction boxes in
Nevada, Idaho, Colorado, Iowa. A million places to tap into Quincey's voice.
    'Yes?' he said, straining to keep his voice level. And he thought of Vicky, who could 
sometimes turn on the radio or turn off the TV without going anywhere near it — and 
Vicky was apparently not even aware she was doing those things.
    'Oh yes, he's for real,' Quincey was saying. 'He's   — what would you say?   — a 
documented case: It hurts his head if he does those things too often, but he can do them. 
They keep him in a little room with a door he can't open and a lock he can't bend. They 
do tests on him. He bends keys. He shuts doors. And I understand he's nearly crazy.'
    'Oh . . . my . . . God,' Andy said faintly.
    'He's part of the peace effort, so it's all right if he goes crazy,' Quincey went on. 'He's going crazy so two hundred and twenty million Americans can stay safe and free. Do you 
understand?'
    'Yes,' Andy had whispered.
    'What about the two people who got married? Nothing. So far as they know. They live 
quietly, in some quiet middle-American state like Ohio. There's maybe a yearly check on
them. Just to see if they're doing anything like bending keys or closing doors without
touching them or doing funny little mentalist routines at the local Backyard Carnival for
Muscular Dystrophy. Good thing those people can't do anything like that, isn't it, Andy?'
    Andy closed his eyes and smelled burned cloth. Sometimes Charlie would pull open
the fridge door, look in, and then crawl off again. And if Vicky was ironing, she would 
glance at the fridge door and it would swing shut again — all without her being aware 
that she was doing anything strange. That was sometimes. At other times it didn't seem to 
work, and she would leave her ironing and close the refrigerator door herself (or turn off
the radio, or turn on the TV). Vicky couldn't bend keys or read thoughts or fly or start 
fires or predict the future. She could sometimes shut a door from across the room and that 
was about the extent of it. Sometimes, after she had done several of these things, Andy
had noticed that she would complain of a headache or an upset stomach, and whether that 
was a physical reaction or some sort of muttered warning from her subconscious, Andy
didn't know. Her ability to do these things got maybe a little stronger around the time of
her period. Such small things, and so infrequently, that Andy had come to think of them 
as normal. As for himself . . . well he could push people. There was no real name for it; 
perhaps autohypnosis came closest. And he couldn't do it often, because it gave him
headaches. Most days he could forget completely that he wasn't utterly normal and never 
really had been since that day in Room 70 of Jason Gearneigh.
    He closed his eyes and on the dark field inside his eyelids he saw that comma-shaped 
bloodstain and the nonwords COR OSUM.
    'Yes, it's a good thing,' Quincey  went on, as if Andy had agreed. 'Or they might put 
them  — in two little rooms where they could work full  — time to keep two hundred and 
twenty million Americans safe and free.'
    'A good thing,' Andy agreed.
    'Those twelve people,' Quincey said, 'maybe they gave those twelve people a drug they 
didn't fully understand. It might have been that someone — a certain Mad Doctor —
might have deliberately misled them. Or maybe he thought he was misleading them and
they were deliberately leading him on. It doesn't matter.'
    'No.'
    'So this drug was given to them and maybe it changed their chromosomes a little bit. 
Or a lot. Or who knows. And maybe two of them got married and decided to have a baby 
and maybe the baby got something more than her eyes and his mouth. Wouldn't they be 
interested in that child?'
    'I bet they would,' Andy said, now so frightened he was having trouble talking at all. 
He had already decided that he would not tell Vicky about calling Quincey.
    'It's like you got lemon, and that's nice, and you got meringue, and  that's nice, too, but 
when you put them together, you've got . . . a whole new taste treat. I bet they'd want to 
see just what that child could do. They might just want to take it and put it in a little room 
and see if it could help make the world safe for democracy. And I think that's all I want to 
say, old buddy, except . . . keep your head down.'24
Voices in a haunted room.
    Keep your head down.
    He turned his head on the motel pillow and looked at Charlie,  who was sleeping
deeply. Charlie kid, what are we going to do? Where can we go and be left alone? How 
is this going to end?
    No answer to any of these questions.
    And at last he slept, while not so far away a green car cruised through the dark, still 
hoping to come upon a big man with broad shoulders in a corduroy jacket and a little girl 
with blond hair in red pants and a green blouse.Longmont, Virginia:
The Shop
1
Two handsome Southern plantation homes faced each other across a long and rolling
grass lawn that was crisscrossed by a few gracefully looping bike paths and a two-lane 
crushed — gravel drive that came over the hill from the main road. Off to one side of one 
of these houses was a large barn, painted a bright red and trimmed a spotless white. Near 
the other was a long stable, done in the same handsome red with white trim. Some of the 
best horseflesh in the South was quartered here. Between the barn and the stable was a 
wide, shallow duckpond, calmly reflecting the sky.
    In the 1860s, the original owners of these two homes had gone off and got themselves 
killed in the war, and all survivors of both families were dead now. The two estates had 
been consolidated into one piece of government property in 1954. It was Shop
headquarters.
    At  ten minutes past nine on, a sunny October day — the day after Andy and Charlie 
left New York, for Albany in a taxicab  — an elderly man with kindly, sparkling eyes and 
wearing a woolen British driving cap on his head biked toward one of the houses. Behind 
him, over the second knoll, was the checkpoint he had come through after a computer ID 
system had okayed his thumbprint. The checkpoint was inside a double run of barbed
wire. The outer run, seven feet high, was marked every sixty feet by signs that read
CAUTION! GOVERNMENT PROPERTY LOW ELECTRIC CHARGE RUNS
THROUGH THIS FENCE! During the day, the charge was indeed low. At night, the onproperty generator boosted it to a lethal voltage, and each morning a squad of five
groundskeepers circled it in little electric golf carts, picking up the bodies of crisped
rabbits, moles, birds, groundhogs, an occasional skunk lying in a pool of smell,
sometimes a deer. And twice, human beings, equally cooked. The space between the
outer and inner runs of barbed wire was ten feet. Day and night, guard dogs circled the 
installation in this run. The guard dogs were Dobermans, and they had been trained to
stay away from the electrified wire. At each corner of the installation there were guard
towers, also built of spanking-red barnboard and trimmed in white. They were manned by 
personnel who were expert in the use of various items of death-dealing hardware. The 
whole place was monitored by TV cameras, and the views these various cameras
presented were constantly scanned by computer. The Longmont facility was secure.
    The elderly man biked on, with a smile for the people he passed. An old, baldheaded 
man in a baseball cap was walking a thin-ankled filly. He raised his hand and called, 'Hi, 
Cap! Ain't this some kind of a day!'
    'Knock your eye out,' the man on the bike agreed. 'Have a good one, Henry.'
    He reached the front of the northernmost of the two homes, dismounted his bike, and 
put down its kickstand. He breathed deeply of the mild morning air, then trotted spryly up 
the wide porch steps and between the broad Doric columns.
    He opened the door and stepped into the wide receiving hall. A young woman with red 
hair sat behind a desk, a statistics-analysis book open in front of her. One hand was
holding her place in the book. The other was in her desk drawer, lightly touching a .38 Smith & Wesson.
    'Good morning, Josie,' the elderly gent said. 
    'Hi, Cap. You're running a little behind, aren't you?' Pretty girls could get away with
this; if it had been Duane's day  on the front desk, he could not have done. Cap was not a 
supporter of women's liberation.
    'My top gear's sticking, darlin.' He put his thumb in the proper slot. Something in the 
console thudded heavily, and a green light fluttered and then remained steady on Josie's 
board. 'You be good, now.'
    'Well, I'll be careful,' she said archly, and crossed her legs.
    Cap roared laughter and walked down the hall.
She watched him go, wondering for a moment if she should have told him that creepy old 
man Wanless had come in some twenty minutes ago. He'd know soon enough, she
supposed, and sighed. What a way to screw up the start of a perfectly fine day, having to 
talk to an old spook like that. But she supposed that a person like Cap, who held a
position of great responsibility, had to take the sour with the sweet.2
Cap's office was at the back of the house. A large bay window gave a magnificent view
of the back lawn, the barn, and the duckpond, which was partially screened with alders. 
Rich McKeon was halfway down the lawn, sitting astride a miniature tractor-lawnmower. 
Cap stood looking at him with his arms crossed behind his back for a moment and then
went over to the Mr. Coffee in the corner. He poured some coffee in his U.S.N. cup,
added Cremora and then sat down and thumbed the intercom.
    'Hi, Rachel,' he said.
    'Hello, Cap. Dr. Wanless is — '
    'I knew it,' Cap said, 'I knew it. I could smell that old whore the minute I came in.'
    'Shall I tell him you're just too busy today?'
    'Don't tell him any such thing,' Cap said stoutly. 'Just let him sit out there in the yellow 
parlor the whole frigging morning. If he doesn't decide to go home, I suppose I can see 
him before lunch.'
    'All right, sir.' Problem solved — for Rachel, anyway, Cap thought with a touch of
resentment. Wanless wasn't really her problem at all. And the fact was, Wanless was
getting to be an embarrassment. He had outlived both his usefulness and his influence.
Well, there was always the Maui compound. And then there was Rainbird.    Cap felt a little inward shudder at that . . . and he wasn't a man who shuddered easily.
    He held down the intercom toggle again. 'I'll want the entire McGee file again, Rachel. 
And at ten-thirty I want to see Al Steinowitz. If Wanless is still here when I finish with
Al, you can send him in.'
    'Very good, Cap.'
    Cap sat back, steepled his fingers, and looked across the room at the picture of George 
Patton on the wall. Patton was standing astride the top hatch of a tank as if he thought he 
were Duke Wayne or someone. 'It's a hard life if you don't weaken,' he told Patton's
image, and sipped his coffee.3
Rachel brought the file in on a whisper-wheeled library cart ten minutes later. There were 
six boxes of papers and reports, four boxes of photographs. There were telephone
transcripts as well. The McGee phone had been bugged since 1978.
    'Thanks, Rachel.'
    'You're welcome. Mr. Steinowitz will be here at ten-thirty.'
    'Of course he will. Has Wanless died yet?'
    'I'm afraid not,' she said, smiling. 'He's just sitting out there and watching Henry walk 
the horses.'
    'Shredding his goddam cigarettes?'
    Rachel covered her mouth like a schoolgirl, giggled, and nodded. 'He's gone through
half a pack already.'
    Cap grunted. Rachel left and he turned to the files. He had been through them how
many times in the last eleven months? A dozen? Two dozen? He had the extracta nearly
by heart. And if Al was right, he would have the two remaining McGees under detection
by the end of the week. The thought caused a hot little trickle of excitement in his belly.
    He began leafing through the McGee file at random, pulling a sheet here, reading a
snatch there. It was his way of plugging back into the situation. His conscious mind was 
in neutral, his subconscious in high gear. What he wanted now was not detail but to put 
his hand to the whole thing. As baseball players say, he needed to find the handle.
    Here was a memo from Wanless himself, a younger Wanless (ah, but they had all been 
young then), dated September 12, 1968. Half a paragraph caught Cap's eye:
. . . of an enormous importance in the continuing study of controllable psychic
phenomena. Further testing on animals would be counterproductive (see overleaf 1) 
and, as I emphasized at the group meeting this summer, testing on convicts or any 
deviant personality might lead to very real problems if Lot Six is even fractionally as 
powerful as we suspect (see overleaf 2). I therefore continue to recommend . . .
    You continue to recommend that we feed it to controlled groups of college students
under all outstanding contingency plans for failure, Cap thought. There had been no
waffling on Wanless's part in those days. No indeed. His motto in those days had been
full speed ahead and devil take the hindmost. Twelve people had been tested. Two of
them had died, one during the test, one shortly afterward. Two had gone hopelessly
insane, and both of them were maimed — one blind, one suffering from psychotic
paralysis, both of them confined at the Maui compound, where they would remain until
their miserable lives ended. So then there were eight. One of them had died in a car
accident in 1972, a car accident that was almost certainly no accident at all but suicide. 
Another had leaped from the roof of the Cleveland Post Office in 1973, and there was no 
question at all about that one; he had left a note saying he 'couldn't stand the pictures in
his head any longer.' The Cleveland police had diagnosed it as suicidal depression and
paranoia.    
Cap and the Shop had diagnosed it as lethal Lot Six hangover. And that had left six.
    Three others had committed suicide between 1974 and 1977, for a known total of four 
suicides and a probable total of five. Almost half the class, you might say. All four of the definite suicides had seemed perfectly normal right up to the time they had used the gun, 
or the rope, or jumped from the high place. But who knew what they might have been
going through? Who really knew?
    So then there were three. Since 1977, when the long-dormant Lot Six project had
suddenly got red hot again, a fellow named James Richardson, who now lived in Los
Angeles, had been under constant covert surveillance. In 1969 he had taken part in the
Lot Six experiment, and during the course of the drug's influence, he had demonstrated 
the same startling range of talents as the rest of them: telekinesis, thought transference,
and maybe the most interesting manifestation of all, at least from the Shop's specialized
point of view: mental domination.
   But as had happened with the others, James Richardson's drug-induced powers seemed 
to have disappeared completely with the wearing off of the drug. Follow-up interviews in 
1971, 1973, and 1975 had shown nothing. Even Wanless had had to admit that, and he 
was a fanatic on the subject of Lot Six. Steady computer readouts on a random basis (and 
they were a lot less random since the McGee thing had started to happen) had shown no 
indication at all that Richardson was using any sort of psi power, either consciously or 
unconsciously. He had graduated in 1971, drifted west through a series of lower-echelon 
managerial jobs — no mental domination there — and now worked for the Telemyne
Corporation.
    Also, he was a fucking faggot.
    Cap sighed.
    They were  continuing to keep an eye on Richardson, but Cap had been personally
convinced that the man was a washout. And that left two, Andy McGee and his wife. The 
serendipity of their marriage had not been lost on the Shop, or on Wanless, who had
begun to bombard  the office with memos, suggesting that any offspring of that marriage
would bear close watching — counting his chickens before they had hatched, you could 
say  — and on more than one occasion Cap had toyed with the idea of telling Wanless 
they had learned Andy McGee had had a vasectomy. That would have shut the old
bastard up. By then Wanless had had his stroke and was effectively useless, really
nothing but a nuisance.
    There had been only the one Lot Six experiment. The results had been so disastrous
that the coverup had been massive and complete . . . and expensive. The order came
down from on high to impose an indefinite moratorium on further testing. Wanless had
plenty to scream about that day, Cap thought . . . and scream he had. But there had been 
no sign at all that the Russians or any other world power was interested in drug-induced 
psionics, and the top brass had concluded that in spite of some positive results, Lot Six
was a blind alley. Looking at the long — term results, one of the scientists who had 
worked on the project compared it to dropping a jet engine into an old Ford. It went like 
hell, all right . . . until it hit the first obstacle. 'Give us another ten thousand years of
evolution,' this fellow had said, 'and we'll try it again.'
    Part of the problem had been that when the drug-induced psi powers were at their
height, the test subjects had also been tripping out of their skulls. No control was
possible. And coming out the other side, the top brass had been nearly shitting their pants.
Covering up the death of an agent, or even of a bystander to an operation  — that was one 
thing. Covering up the death of a student who had suffered a heart attack, the
disappearance of two others, and lingering traces of hysteria and paranoia in yet others —that was a different matter altogether. All of them had friends and associates, even if one 
of the requirements by which the test subjects had been picked was a scarcity of close 
relatives. The costs and the risks had been enormous. They had involved  nearly seven
hundred thousand dollars in hush money and the sanction of at least one person — the 
godfather of the fellow, who had clawed his eyes out. The godfather just would not quit. 
He was going to get to the root of the matter. As it turned out, the  only place the
godfather had got was to the bottom of the Baltimore Trench, where he presumably still
was, with two cement blocks tied around whatever remained of his legs.    And still, a great deal of it — too damn much — had just been luck.
    So the Lot Six project had been shelved with a continuing yearly budget allotment. The 
money was used to continue random surveillance on the survivors in case something
turned up — some pattern.
    Eventually, one had.
    Cap hunted through a folder of photographs and came up with an eight-by-ten glossy 
black-and-white of the girl. It had been taken three years ago, when she was four and
attending the Free Children's Nursery School in Harrison. The picture had been taken
with a telephoto lens from the back of a bakery van and later blown up and cropped to 
turn a picture of a lot of boys and girls at playtime into a portrait of a smiling little girl
with her pigtails flying and the pistol grip of a jumprope in each hand.    Cap looked at this picture sentimentally for some time. Wanless, in the aftermath of his 
stroke, had discovered fear. Wanless now thought the little girl would have to be
sanctioned. And although Wanless was among the outs these days, there were those who 
concurred with his opinion — those who were among the ins. Cap hoped like hell that it 
wouldn't come to that. He had three grandchildren himself, two of them just about
Charlene McGee's age.
    Of course they would have to separate the girl from her father. Probably permanently. 
And he would almost certainly have to be sanctioned . . . after he had served his purpose, 
of course.
    It was quarter past ten. He buzzed Rachel. 'Is Albert Steinowitz here yet?'
    'Just this minute arrived, sir.'
    'Very good. Send him in, please.'
4
'I want you to take personal charge of the endgame, Al.'
    'Very good, Cap.'
    Albert Steinowitz was a small man with a yellow pale complexion and very black hair; 
in earlier years he had sometimes been mistaken for the actor Victor Jory. Cap had
worked with Steinowitz off and on for nearly eight years  — in fact they had come over 
from the navy together  — and to him A1 had always looked like a man about to enter the 
hospital for a terminal stay. He smoked constantly, except in here, where it wasn't
allowed. He  walked with a slow, stately stride that invested him with a strange kind of
dignity, and impenetrable dignity is a rare attribute in any man. Cap, who saw all the
medical records of Section One agents, knew that Albert's dignified walk was bogus; he 
suffered badly from hemorrhoids and had been operated on for them twice. He hadrefused a third operation because it might mean a colostomy bag on his leg for the rest of 
his life. His dignified walk always made Cap think of the fairy tale about the mermaid
who  wanted to be a woman and the price she paid for legs and feet. Cap imagined that 
her walk had been rather dignified, too.
    'How soon can you be in Albany?' he asked Al now.
    'An hour after I leave here.'
    'Good. I won't keep you long. What's the status up there?'
    Albert folded his small, slightly yellow hands in his lap. 'The state police are
cooperating nicely. All highways leading out of Albany have been road blocked. The
blocks are set up in concentric circles with Albany County Airport at their center. Radius 
of thirty-five miles.'
    'You're assuming they didn't hitch a ride.'
    'We have to,' Albert said. 'If they hooked a ride with someone who took them two
hundred miles or so, of course we'll have to start all over again. But I'm betting they're 
inside that circle.'
    'Oh? Why is that, Albert?' Cap leaned forward. Albert Steinowitz was, without a doubt, 
the best agent, except maybe for Rainbird, in the Shop's employ. He was bright, intuitive 
— and ruthless when the job demanded that.
   'Partly hunch,' Albert said. 'Partly the stuff' we got back from the computer when we 
fed in everything we knew about the last three years of Andrew McGee's life. We asked it 
to pull out any and all patterns that might apply to this ability he's supposed to have.'
    'He does have it, Al,' Cap said gently. 'That's what makes this operation so damned
delicate.'
    'All right, he has it,' Al said. 'But the computer readouts suggest that his ability to use it 
is extremely limited. If he overuses it, it makes him sick.'
    'Right. We're counting on that.'
    'He was running a storefront operation in New York, a Dale Carnegie kind of thing.'
    Cap nodded. Confidence Associates, an operation aimed mainly at timid executives.
Enough to keep him and the girl in bread, milk, and meat, but not much more.
    'We've debriefed his last group,' Albert Steinowitz said. 'There were sixteen of them,
and each of them paid a split tuition fee  — one hundred dollars at enrollment, a hundred 
more halfway through the course, if they felt the course was helping them. Of course they 
all did.'
    Cap nodded. McGee's talent was admirably suited for investing people with
confidence. He literally pushed them into it.
    'We fed their answers to several key questions into the computer. The questions were, 
did you feel better about yourself and the Confidence Associates course at specific times? 
Can you remember days at work following your Confidence Associates meetings when
you felt like a tiger? Have you — '
    'Felt like a tiger?' Cap asked. 'Jesus, you asked them if they felt like tigers?'
    'The computer suggests the wording.'
    'Okay, go on.'
    'The third key question was, have you had any specific, measurable success at your job 
since taking the Confidence Associates course? That was the question they could all
respond to with the most objectivity and reliability, because people tend to remember the 
day they got the raise or the pat on the back from the boss. They were eager to talk. I found it a little spooky, Cap.  He sure did what he promised. Of the sixteen, eleven of
them have had promotions — eleven. Of the other five, three are in jobs where
promotions are made only at certain set times.'
    'No one is arguing McGee's capability,' Cap said. 'Not anymore.'
    'Okay. I'm getting back around to the point here. It was a six-week course. Using the 
answers to the key questions, the computer came up with four spike dates . . . that is, days 
when McGee probably supplemented all the usual hip-hip-hooray-you-can-do-it-if-youtry stuff' with a good hard push. The dates we have are August seventeenth, September 
first , September nineteenth . . . and October fourth.'
    'Proving?'
    'Well, he pushed that cab driver last night. Pushed him hard. That dude is still rocking 
and reeling. We figure Andy McGee is tipped over. Sick. Maybe immobilized.' Albert
looked at Cap steadily. 'Computer gave us a twenty-six-percent probability that he's
dead.'
    'What?'
    'Well, he's overdone it before and wound up in bed. He's doing something to his brain . 
. . God knows what. Giving himself pinprick hemorrhages, maybe. It could be a
progressive thing. The computer figures there's slightly better than a one-in-four chance
he's dead, either of a heart attack or, more probably, a stroke.'
   'He had to use it before he was recharged,' Cap said.
    Albert nodded and took something out of his pocket. It was encased in limp plastic. He 
passed it to Cap, who looked at it and then passed it back.
    'What's that supposed to mean?' he asked.
    'Not that much,' A1 said, looking at the bill in its plastic envelope meditatively. 'Just
what McGee paid his cab fare with.'
    'He went to Albany from New York City on a one-dollar bill, huh?' Cap took it back 
and looked at it with renewed interest.  'Cab fares sure must be . . . what the hell!' He 
dropped the plastic encased bill on his desk as if it were hot and sat back, blinking.
    'You too, huh?' Al said. 'Did you see it?'
    'Christ, I don't know what I saw,' Cap said, and reached for the ceramic box where he 
kept his acid neutralizers. 'For just a second it didn't look like a one-dollar bill at all.'
    'But now it does?'
    Cap peered at the bill. 'It sure does. That's George, all — Christ!' He sat back so 
violently this time that he almost  rapped the back of his head on the dark wood paneling 
behind his desk. He looked at Al. 'The face . . . seemed to change for a second there. 
Grew glasses, or something. Is it a trick?'
    'Oh, it's a hell of a good trick,' Al said, taking the bill back. 'I saw it as well, although I 
don't anymore. I think I've adjusted to it now . . . although I'll be damned if I know how. 
It's not there, of course. It's just some kind of crazy hallucination. But I even made the 
face. It's Ben Franklin.'
    'You got this from the cab driver?' Cap asked, looking at the bill, fascinated, waiting
for the change again. But it was only George Washington.
    Al laughed. 'Yeah,' he said. 'We took the bill and gave him a check for five hundred 
dollars. He's better off, really.'
   'Why?'
    'Ben Franklin isn't on the five hundred, he's on the hundred. Apparently McGee didn't know.'
    'Let me see that again.'
    Al handed the one-dollar bill back to Cap, and Cap stared fixedly at it for almost a full 
two minutes. Just as he was about to hand it back, it flickered again  — unsettling. But at 
least this time he felt that the flicker was definitely in his mind, and not in the bill, or on
it, or whatever.
    'I'll tell you something else,' Cap said. 'I'm not sure, but I don't think Franklin's wearing 
glasses on his currency portrait, either. Otherwise, it's . . .' He trailed off, not sure how to 
complete the thought. Goddam weird came to mind, and he dismissed it.
    'Yeah,' A1 said. 'Whatever it is, the effect is dissipating. This morning I showed it to 
maybe six people. A couple of them thought they saw something, but not like that cab
driver and the girl he lives with.'
    'So you're figuring he pushed too hard?'
    'Yes. I doubt if he could keep going. They may have slept in  the woods, or in an
outlying motel. They may have broken into a summer cabin in the area. But I think
they're around and we'll be able to put the arm on them without too much trouble.'
    'How many men do you need to do the job?'
    'We've got what we need,' A1 said. 'Counting the state police, there are better than
seven hundred people in on this little houseparty. Priority  A-one-A. They're going door to 
door and house to house. We've checked every hotel and motel in the immediate Albany
area already — better than forty of them. We're spreading into the neighbouring towns
now. A man and a little girl . . . they stick out like a sore thumb. We'll get them. Or the 
girl, if he's dead.' Albert stood up. 'And I think I ought to get on it. I'd like to be there 
when it goes down.'
    'Of course you would. Bring them to me, Al.'
    'I will,' Albert said, and walked toward the door.
    'Albert?'
    He turned back, a small man with an unhealthy yellow complexion. 'Who  is on the five 
hundred? Did you check that out?'
    Albert Steinowitz smiled. 'McKinley,' he said. 'He was assassinated.'
    He went out, closing the door gently behind him, leaving Cap to consider.
5
Ten minutes later, Cap thumbed the intercom again. 'Is Rainbird back from Venice yet,
Rachel?'
    'As of yesterday,' Rachel said, and Cap fancied he could hear the distaste even in
Rachel's carefully cultivated Boss Secretary tones.
    'Is he here or at Sanibel?' The Shop maintained an R-and-R facility on Sanibel Island, 
Florida.
    There was a pause as Rachel checked with the computer.
    'Longmont, Cap. As of eighteen hundred yesterday. Sleeping off the jet lag, perhaps.'
    'Have someone wake him up,' Cap said. 'I'd like to see him when Wanless leaves . . . 
always assuming Wanless is still here?'
    'As of fifteen minutes ago he was.'    'All right . . . let's say Rainbird at noon.'
    'Yes, sir.'
    'You're a good girl, Rachel.'
    'Thank you, sir.' She sounded touched. Cap liked her, liked her very much.
    'Send in Dr. Wanless please, Rachel.'
    He settled back, joined his hands in front of him, and thought, For my sins.

6
Dr. Joseph Wanless had suffered his stroke on the same day Richard Nixon announced 
his resignation of the presidency — August 8, 1974. It had been a cerebral accident of 
moderate severity, and he had never come all the way back physically. Nor mentally, in
Cap's opinion. It was only following the stroke that Wanless's interest in the Lot Six
experiment and follow-up had become constant and obsessive.
    He came  into the room leaning over a cane, the light from the bay window catching his 
round, rimless glasses and making them glare blankly. His left hand was a drawnup claw. 
The left side of his mouth drifted in a constant glacial sneer.
    Rachel looked at Cap  sympathetically over Wanless's shoulder and Cap nodded that
she could go. She did, closing the door quietly.
    'The good doctor,' Cap said humorlessly.
    'How does it progress?' Wanless asked, sitting down with a grunt.
    'Classified,' Cap said. 'You know that, Joe. What can I do for you today.'
    'I have seen the activity around this place,' Wanless said, ignoring Cap's question.
'What else had I to do while I cooled my heels all morning?'
    'If you come without an appointment — '
    'You think  you nearly have them again,' Wanless said. 'Why else that hatchet man
Steinowitz? Well, maybe you do. Maybe so. But you have thought so before, haven't
you?'
    'What do you want, Joe?' Cap didn't like to be reminded of past failures. They had
actually had the girl for a while. The men who had been involved in that were still not
operational and maybe never would be.
    'What do I always want?' Wanless asked, hunched over his cane. Oh Christ, Cap
thought, the old fuck's going to wax rhetorical. 'Why do I stay alive? To persuade you to 
sanction them both. To sanction that James Richardson as well. To sanction the ones on
Maui. Extreme sanction, Captain Hollister. Expunge them. Wipe them off the face of the 
earth.'
    Cap sighed.
    Wanless gestured toward the library cart with his claw-hand and said, 'You've been
through the files again, I see.'
    'I have them almost by heart,' Cap said, and then smiled a little. He had been eating and 
drinking Lot Six for the last year; it had been a constant item on the agenda at every
meeting during the two years before that. So maybe Wanless wasn't the only obsessive
character around here, at that.
    The difference is, I get paid for it. With Wanless it's a hobby. A dangerous hobby.
    'You read them but you don't learn,' Wanless said. 'Let me try once more to convert you to the way of truth, Captain Hollister.'
    Cap began to protest, and then the thought of Rainbird and his noon appointment came 
to mind, and his face smoothed out. It became calm, even sympathetic. 'All right,' he said. 
'Fire when ready, Gridley.'
    'You still think I'm crazy, don't you? A lunatic.'
    'You said that, not I.'
    'It would be well for you to remember that I was the first one to suggest a testing
program with dilysergic triune acid.'
    'I have days when I wish you hadn't,' Cap said. If he closed his eyes, he could still see 
Wanless's first report, a two-hundred-page prospectus on the drug that had first been
known as DLT, then, among the technicians involved, as 'booster-acid,'  and finally as Lot 
Six. Cap's predecessor had okayed the original project; that gentleman had been buried in 
Arlington with full military honors six years ago.
    'All I am saying is that my opinion should carry some weight,' Wanless said. He
sounded tired this morning; his words were slow and furry. The twisted sneer on the left 
side of his mouth did not move as he spoke.
    'I'm listening,' Cap said.
    'So far as I am able to tell, I am the only psychologist or medical man who still has 
your ear at all. Your people have become blinded by one thing and one thing only: what 
this man and this girl can mean to the security of America . . . and possibly to the future 
balance of power. From what we've been able to tell by following this McGee's backtrail, 
he is a kind of benign Rasputin. He can make . . .'
    Wanless droned on, but Cap lost him temporarily.  Benign Rasputin, he thought. Purple 
as the phrase was, he rather liked it. He wondered what Wanless would say if told the 
computer had issued one-in-four odds that McGee had sanctioned himself getting out of
New York City. Probably would have been overjoyed. And if he had showed Wanless 
that strange bill? Probably have another stroke, Cap thought, and covered his mouth to
hide a smile.
    'It is the girl I am primarily worried about,' Wanless told him for the twentieth?
thirtieth? fiftieth? time. 'McGee and Tomlinson marrying . . . a thousand-to-one chance. It 
should have been prevented at all costs. Yet who could have foreseen — '
    'You were all in favor of it at the time,' Cap said, and then added dryly, 'I do believe 
you would have given the bride away if they'd asked you.'
    'None of us realized,' Wanless muttered. 'It took a stroke to make me see. Lot Six was 
nothing but a synthetic copy of a pituitary extract, after all . . . an incredibly powerful
painkiller hallucinogen that we did not understand then and that we don't understand
now. We know — or at least we are ninety-nine-percent sure — that the natural
counterpart of this substance is responsible in some way for the occasional flashes of psi
ability that nearly all human beings demonstrate from time to time. A surprisingly wide
range of phenomena: precognition, telekinesis, mental domination, bursts of superhuman
strength, temporary control  over the sympathetic nervous system. Did you know that the 
pituitary gland becomes suddenly overactive in nearly all biofeedback experiments?'
    Cap did. Wanless had told him this and all the rest times without number. But there
was no need to answer; Wanless's rhetoric was in full fine flower this morning, the
sermon well-launched. And Cap was disposed to listen . . . this one last time. Let the old 
man have his turn at bat. For Wanless, it was the bottom of the ninth.    'Yes, this is true,' Wanless answered himself. 'It's active in biofeedback, it's active in
REM sleep, and people with damaged pituitaries rarely dream normally. People with
damaged pituitaries have a tremendously high incidence of brain tumours and leukemia.
The pituitary gland, Captain Hollister. It is, speaking in terms of evolution, the oldest
endocrine gland in the human body. During early adolescence it dumps many times its
own weight in glandular secretions into the bloodstream. It's a terribly important gland, a 
terribly mysterious gland. If I believed in the human soul, Captain Hollister, I would say
it resides within the pituitary gland.'
    Cap grunted.
    'We know these things,' Wanless said, 'and we know that Lot Six somehow changed 
the physical composition of the pituitary  glands of those who participated in the
experiment. Even that of your so-called 'quiet one,' James Richardson. Most importantly, 
we can deduce from the girl that it also changes the chromosome structure in some way . 
. . and that the change in the pituitary gland may be a genuine mutation.'
    'The X factor was passed on.'
    'No,' Wanless said. 'That is one of the many things you fail to grasp, Captain Hollister. 
Andrew McGee became an X factor in his post experiment life. Victoria Tomlinson
became a Y factor — also affected, but not in the same way as her husband. The woman 
retained a low-threshold telekinetic power. The man retained a mid-level mental
dominance ability. The little girl, though . . . the little girl, Captain Hollister . . . what is 
she? We don't really know. She is the Z factor.'
    'We intend to find out,' Cap said softly.
    Now both sides of Wanless's mouth sneered. 'You intend to find out,' he echoed. 'Yes, 
if you persist, you certainly may . . . you blind, obsessive fools.' He closed his eyes for a 
moment and put one hand over them. Cap watched him calmly.
    Wanless said: 'One thing you know already. She lights fires.'
    'Yes.'
    'You assume that she has inherited her mother's telekinetic ability. In fact, you strongly 
suspect it.'
    'Yes.'
    'As a very small child, she was totally unable to control these . . . these talents, for want 
of a better word . . .'
    'A small child is unable to control its bowels,' Cap said, using one of the examples set 
forth in the extracta. 'But as the child grows older — '
    'Yes, yes, I am familiar with the analogy. But an older child may still have accidents.'
    Smiling, Cap answered, 'We're going to keep her in a fireproof room.'
    'A cell.'
    Still smiling, Cap said, 'If you prefer.'
    'I offer you this deduction,' Wanless said. 'She does not like to use this ability she has. 
She has been frightened of it, and this fright has been instilled in her quite deliberately. I 
will give you a parallel example. My brother's child. There were matches in the house. 
Freddy wanted to play with them. Light them and then shake them out. `Pretty, pretty,' he 
would say. And so my brother set out to make a complex. To frighten him so badly he 
would never play with the matches again. He told Freddy  that the heads of the matches 
were sulfur and that they would make his teeth rot and fall out. That looking at struck
matches would eventually blind him. And finally, he held Freddy's hand momentarilyover a lit match and singed him with it.
    'Your brother,' Cap murmured, 'sounds like a true prince among men.'    'Better a small red place on the boy's hand than a child in the burn unit, wetpacked, 
with third-degree burns over sixty percent of his body,' Wanless said grimly.
    'Better still to put the matches out of the child's reach.'
    'Can you put Charlene McGee's matches out of her reach?' Wanless asked.
    Cap nodded slowly. 'You have a point of a sort, but — '
    'Ask yourself this, Captain Hollister: how must it have been for Andrew and Victoria 
McGee when this child was an infant? After they begin to make the necessary
connection? The bottle is late. The baby cries. At the same time, one of the stuffed
animals right there in the crib with her bursts into smoky flame. There is a mess in the 
diaper. The baby cries. A moment later the dirty clothes in the hamper begin to burn
spontaneously. You have the records, Captain Hollister; you know how it was in that
house. A fire extinguisher and a smoke detector in every single room. And once it was 
her  hair, Captain Hollister; they came into her room and found her standing in her crib 
and screaming and her hair was on fire.'
    'Yes,' Cap said, 'it must have made them goddam nervous.'
    'So,' Wanless said, 'they toilet-trained her . . . and they fire-trained her.'
    'Fire-training,' Cap mused.
    'Which is only to say that, like my brother and his boy Freddy, they made a complex. 
You have quoted me that analogy, Captain Hollister, so let us examine it for a moment. 
What is toilet-training? It is making a complex, pure and simple.' And suddenly
astonishingly, the old man's voice climbed to a high, wavering treble, the voice of a
woman scolding a baby. Cap looked on with disgusted astonishment.
    'You bad baby!' Wanless cried. 'Look what you've done! It's nasty, baby, see how nasty 
it is? It's nasty to do it in your pants! Do grown-ups do it in their pants? Do it on the pot, 
baby, on the pot.'
    'Please,' Cap said, pained.
    'It is the making of a complex,' Wanless said. 'Toilet-training is accomplished by
focusing the child's attention on his own eliminatory processes in a way we would
consider unhealthy if the object of fixation were something different. How strong is the
complex inculcated in the child, you might ask? Richard Damon of the University of
Washington asked himself this question and made an experiment to find out. He
advertised for fifty student volunteers. He filled them up with water and soda and milk
until they all badly needed to urinate. After a certain set time had passed, he told them 
they could go . . . if they went in their pants.'
    'That's disgusting!' Cap said loudly. He was shocked and sickened. That wasn't an
experiment; it was an exercise in degeneracy.
    'See how well the complex has set in your own psyche,' Wanless said quietly. 'You did 
not think it was so disgusting when you were twenty months old. Then, when you had to 
go, you went. You would have gone sitting on the pope's lap if someone had set you there 
and you had to go. The point of the Damon experiment, Captain Hollister, is this: most of 
them  couldn't. They understood that the ordinary rules of behavior had been set aside, at 
least for the course of the experiment; they were each alone in quarters at least as private 
as the ordinary bathroom . . . but fully eighty-eight percent of them just couldn't. No 
matter how strong the physical need was, the complex instilled by their parents wasstronger.'
    'This is nothing but pointless wandering,' Cap said curtly.
    'No, it isn't. I want you to consider the parallels between toilet-training and fire-training 
. . . and the one significant difference, which is the quantum leap between the  urgency of 
accomplishing the former and the latter. If the child toilet-trains slowly, what are the
consequences? Minor unpleasantness. His rooms smells if not constantly aired. The
mamma is chained to her washing machine. The cleaners may have to be called in to
shampoo the carpet after the job is finally done. At the very worst, the baby may have a 
constant diaper rash, and that will only happen if the baby's skin is very sensitive or if the 
mamma is a sloven about keeping him clean. But the consequences to a child who can
make fire. . .'
    His eyes glittered. The left side of his mouth sneered.
'My estimation of the McGees as  parents is very high,' Wanless said. 'Somehow they got 
her through it. I would imagine they began the job long before parents usually begin the 
toilet-training process; perhaps even before she was able to crawl. `Baby mustn't! Baby
hurt herself! No, no, no! Bad girl! Bad girl! Ba-ad girl!''
    'But your own computer suggests by its readouts that she is overcoming her complex, 
Captain Hollister. She is in an enviable position to do it. She is young, and the complex
has not had a chance to set in a bed of years until it becomes like cement. And she has her 
father with her! Do you realize the significance of that simple fact? No, you do not. The 
father is the authority figure. He holds the psychic reins of every fixation in the female
child. Oral, anal, genital; behind each, like a shadowy figure standing behind a curtain, is 
the father authority figure. To the girl-child he is Moses; the laws are his laws, handed 
down she knows not how, but his to enforce. He is perhaps the only person on earth who 
can remove  this block. Our complexes, Captain Hollister, always give us the most agony
and psychic distress when those who have inculcated them die and pass beyond argument 
. . . and mercy.'
    Cap glanced at his watch and saw that Wanless had been in here almost forty minutes. 
It felt like hours. 'Are you almost done? I have another appointment — '
    'When complexes go, they go like dams bursting after torrential rains,' Wanless said
softly. 'We have a promiscuous girl who is nineteen years old. Already she has had three 
hundred lovers. Her body is as hot with sexual infection as that of a forty-year-old 
prostitute. But until she was seventeen she was a virgin. Her father was a minister who
told her again and again as a little girl that sex inside marriage was a necessary evil, that 
sex outside marriage was hell and damnation, that sex was the apple of original sin.
When a complex like that goes, it goes like a breaking dam. First there is a crack or two, 
little trickling rills of water so small as to escape notice. And according to your
computer's information, that is where we are now with this (little girl. Suggestions that
she has used her ability to help her father, at her father's urging. And then it all goes at 
once, spewing out millions of gallons of water, destroying everything in its path,
drowning 'everyone caught in its way, changing the landscape forever!'    Wanless's croaking voice had risen from its original soft pitch to a broken-voiced old 
man's shout — but it was more peevish than magnificent.
    'Listen,' he said to Cap. 'For once, listen to me. Drop the blinders from your eyes. The 
man is not dangerous in and of himself. He has a little power, a toy, a plaything. He
understands that. He has not been able to use it to make a million dollars. He does not rule men and nations. He has used his power to help fat women lose weight. He has used 
it to help timid executives gain confidence. He is unable to use the power often or well . . 
. some inner physiological factor limits him. But the girl is incredibly dangerous. She is 
on the run with her daddy, faced with a survival situation. She is badly frightened. And
he is frightened as well, which is what makes him dangerous. Not in and of himself, but 
because you are forcing him to reeducate the little girl.  You are forcing him to change her 
conceptions about the power inside her. You are forcing him to force her to use it.'
    Wanless was breathing hard.
    Playing out the scenario — the end was now in sight  — Cap said calmly, 'What do you 
suggest?'
    'The man must be killed. Quickly. Before he can do anymore pick-and-shovel work on 
the complex he and his wife built into the little girl. And the girl must also be killed, I
believe. In case the damage has already been done.'
    'She's only a little girl, Wanless, after all. She can light fires, yes. Pyrokinesis, we call
it. But you're making it sound like armageddon.'
    'Perhaps it will be,' Wanless said. 'You mustn't let her age and size fool you into
forgetting the Z factor . . . which is exactly what  you are doing, of course. Suppose
lighting fires is only the tip of this iceberg? Suppose the talent grows? She is seven.
When John Milton was seven, he was perhaps a small boy grasping a stick of charcoal
and laboring to write his own name in letters his mamma and daddy could understand. He 
was a baby. John Milton grew up to write Paradise Lost.'
    'I don't know what the hell you're talking about,' Cap said flatly.    'I am talking about the potential for destruction. I am talking about a talent which is
linked to the pituitary gland, a gland which is nearly dormant in a child Charlene
McGee's age. What happens when she becomes an adolescent and that gland awakes
from its sleep and becomes for twenty months the most powerful force in the human
body, ordering everything from the sudden maturation of the primary and secondary sex
characteristics to an increased production of visual purple in the eye? Suppose you have a 
child capable of eventually creating a nuclear explosion simply by the force of her will?'
    'That's the most insane thing I've ever heard.'
    'Is it? Then let me progress from insanity to utter lunacy, Captain Hollister. Suppose
there is a little girl out there someplace this morning who has within her, lying dormant
only for the time being, the power to someday crack the very planet in two like a china 
plate in a shooting gallery?'
    They looked at each other in silence. And suddenly the intercom buzzed.
    After a moment, Cap leaned over and thumbed it. 'Yes, Rachel?' Goddamned if the  old 
man hadn't had him there, for just a moment. He was like some awful gore-crow, and that 
was another reason Cap didn't like him. He was a go-getter himself, and if there was one 
thing he couldn't stand, it was a pessimist.
    'You have a call on the scrambler,' Rachel said. 'From the service area.'
    'All right, dear. Thanks. Hold it for a couple of minutes, okay?'
    'Yes, sir.'
    He sat back in his chair. 'I have to terminate this interview, Dr. Wanless. You may be 
sure that I'll consider everything you've said very carefully.'
    'Will you?' Wanless asked. The frozen side of his mouth seemed to sneer cynically.
    'Yes.'    Wanless said: 'The girl . . . McGee . . . and this fellow Richardson . . . they are the last 
three marks of a dead equation, Captain Hollister. Erase them. Start over. The girl is very 
dangerous.'
    'I'll consider everything you've said,' Cap repeated.
    'Do so.' And Wanless finally began to struggle to his feet, propping himself on his
cane. It took him a long time. At last he was up.
    'Winter is coming,' he said to Cap. 'These old bones dread it.'
    'Are you staying in Longmont tonight?'
    'No, Washington.'
    Cap hesitated and then said, 'Stay at the Mayflower. I may want to get in touch with 
you.'
    Something in the old man's eyes  — gratitude? Yes, almost certainly that. 'Very good, 
Captain Hollister,' he said, and worked his way back to the door on his cane  — an old 
man who had once opened Pandora's box and now wanted to shoot all of the things that 
had flown out instead of putting them to work.
    When the door had snicked closed behind him, Cap breathed a sigh of relief and picked 
up the scrambler phone.
7
'Who am I talking to?'
    'Orv Jamieson, sir.'
    'Have you got them, Jamieson?'
    'Not yet, sir, but we found something interesting at the airport.'    'What's that?'
    'All the pay phones are empty. We found a few quarters and dimes on the floors of
some of them.'
    'Jimmied?'
    'No, sir. That's why I called you. They haven't been jimmied, they're just empty. Phone 
company's going crazy.'
    'All right, Jamieson.'
    'It speeds things up. We've been figuring that maybe the guy hid the girl outside and
only checked himself in. But either way, we figure now that we're looking for a guy who 
paid with a lot of change.'
    'If they are at a motel and not shacked up at a summer camp somewhere.'
    'Yes, sir.'
    'Carry on, OJ.'
    'Yes, sir. Thank you.' He sounded absurdly pleased that his nickname had been
remembered.
    Cap hung up. He sat with his eyes half closed for five minutes, thinking. The mellow
autumn light fell through the bay window and lit the office, warmed it. Then he leaned
forward and got Rachel again.
    'Is John Rainbird there?'
    'Yes he is, Cap.'
    'Give me another five minutes and then send him in. I want to talk to Norville Bates out in the service area. He's the head honcho until A1 gets there.'
    'Yes, sir,' Rachel said, a little doubtfully. 'It will have to be an open line. Walkie-talkie 
link-up. Not very — '
    'Yes, that's fine,' he said impatiently.
    It took two minutes. Bates's voice was thin and crackling. He was a good man  — not 
very imaginative, but a plugger. The kind of man Cap wanted to have holding the fort
until Albert Steinowitz could get there. At last Norville came on the line and told Cap
they were beginning to spread out into the surrounding towns — Oakville, Tremont,
Messalonsett, Hastings Glen, Looton.
    'All right, Norville, that's good,' Cap said. He thought of Wanless saying You are
forcing him to reeducate the little girl. He thought of Jamieson telling him all the phones 
were empty. McGee hadn't done that. The girl had done it. And then, because she was 
still up, she had burned that soldier's shoes off, probably by accident. Wanless would be 
pleased to know that Cap was going to take fifty percent of his advice after all  — the old 
turd had been amazingly eloquent this morning.
    'Things have changed,' Cap said. 'We've got to have the big boy sanctioned. Extreme 
sanction. You follow?'
    'Extreme sanction,' Norville said flatly. 'Yes, sir.'
    'Very good, Norville,' Cap said softly. He put the phone down and waited for John
Rainbird to come in.
    The door opened a moment later and there he stood, as big as life and twice as ugly. He 
was so naturally quiet, this half Cherokee, that if you had been looking down at your
desk, reading or answering correspondence, you wouldn't have been aware that anyone
was in the room with you at all. Cap knew how rare that was. Most people could sense 
another person in the room: Wanless had once called that ability not a sixth sense but a 
bottom-of-the-barrel sense, a knowledge born of infinitesimal input from the five normal
senses. But with Rainbird, you didn't know. Not one of the whisker thin sensory tripwires 
so much as vibrated. Al Steinowitz had said a strange thing about Rainbird once over
glasses of port in Cap's living room: 'He's the one human being I ever met who doesn't 
push air in front of him when he walks.' And Cap was glad Rainbird was on their side, 
because he was the only human he had ever met who completely terrified him.
    'Rainbird was a troll, an orc, a balrog of a man. He stood two inches shy of seven feet 
tall, and he wore his glossy black hair drawn back and tied in a curt ponytail. Ten years 
before, a Claymore had blown up in his face during his second tour of Vietnam, and now 
his countenance was a horror show of scar tissue and runneled flesh. His left eye was
gone. There was nothing where it had been but a ravine. He would not have plastic
surgery or an artificial eye because, he said, when he got to the happy hunting ground
beyond, he would be asked to show his battlescars. When he said such things, you did not 
know whether to believe him or not; you did not know if he was serious or leading you 
on for reasons of his own.
    Over the years, Rainbird had been a surprisingly good agent — partially because the 
last thing on earth he looked like was an agent, mostly because there was an apt,
ferociously bright mind behind that mask of flesh. He spoke four languages fluently and
had an understanding of three others. He was taking a sleep course in Russian. When he 
spoke, his voice was low, musical, and civilized.
    'Good afternoon, Cap.'    'Is it afternoon?' Cap asked, surprised.    Rainbird smiled, showing a big set of perfectly white teeth — shark's teeth, Cap
thought. 'By fourteen minutes,' he said. 'I picked up a Seiko digital watch on the black
market in Venice. It is fascinating. Little black numbers that change constantly. A feat of 
technology. I often think, Cap, that we fought the war in Vietnam not to win but to
perform feats of technology. We fought it in order to create the cheap digital-wristwatch, 
the home Ping-Pong game that hooks up to one's TV, the pocket calculator. I look at my 
new wristwatch in the dark of night. It tells me I am closer to my death, second by
second. That is good news.'
    'Sit down, old friend,' Cap said. As always when he talked to Rainbird, his mouth was 
dry and he had to restrain his  hands, which wanted to twine and knot together on the 
polished surface of his desk. All of that, and he believed that Rainbird liked him — if
Rainbird could be said to like anyone.
    Rainbird sat down. He was wearing old bluejeans and a faded chambray shirt.
    'How was Venice?' Cap asked.
    'Sinking,' Rainbird said.
    'I have a job for you, if you want it. It is a small one, but it may lead to an assignment 
you'll find considerably more interesting.'
    'Tell me.'
    'Strictly volunteer,' Cap persisted. 'You're still on R and R.'
    'Tell me,' Rainbird repeated gently, and Cap told him. He was with Rainbird for only
fifteen minutes, but it seemed an hour. When the big Indian left, Cap breathed a long
sigh. Both Wanless and Rainbird in one morning — that would take the snap out of
anyone's day. But the morning was over now, a lot had been accomplished, and who
knew what might lie ahead this afternoon? He buzzed Rachel.
    'Yes, Cap?'
    'I'll be eating in, darling. Would you get me something from  the cafeteria? It doesn't 
matter what. Anything. Thank you, Rachel.'
    Alone at last. The scrambler phone lay silent on its thick base, filled with microcircuits 
and memory chips and God alone knew what else. When it buzzed again, it would
probably be Albert or Norville to tell him that it was over in New York  — the girl taken, 
her father dead. That would be good news.
    Cap closed his eyes again. Thoughts and phrases floated through his mind like large,
lazy kites. Mental domination. Their think-tank boys said the possibilities were
enormous. Imagine someone like McGee close to Castro, or the Ayatollah Khomeini.
Imagine him getting close enough to that pinko Ted Kennedy to suggest in a low voice of 
utter conviction that suicide was the best answer. Imagine a man like that sicced on the 
leaders of the various communist guerrilla groups. It was a shame they had to lose him. 
But . . . what could be made to happen once could be made to happen again.
    The little girl. Wanless saying  The power to someday crack the very planet in two like 
a china plate in a shooting gallery . . . ridiculous, of course. Wanless had gone as crazy 
as the little boy in the D. H. Lawrence story, the one who could pick the winners at the 
racetrack. Lot Six had turned into battery acid for Wanless; it had eaten a number of
large, gaping holes in the man's good sense. She was a little girl, not a doomsday
weapon. And they had to hang onto her at least long enough to document what she was 
and to chart what she could be. That alone would be enough to reactivate the Lot Sixtesting program. If she could be persuaded to use her powers for the good of the country, 
so much the better.
    So much the better, Cap thought.
    The scrambler phone suddenly uttered its long, hoarse cry.
    His pulse suddenly leaping, Cap grabbed it.The Incident at the
Manders Farm
1
While Cap discussed her future with Al Steinowitz in Longmont, Charlie McGee was
sitting on the edge of the motel bed in Unit Sixteen of the Slumberland, yawning and
stretching.  Bright morning sunlight fell aslant through the window, out of a sky that was
a deep and blameless autumn blue. Things seemed so much better in the good daylight.
    She looked at her daddy, who was nothing but a motionless hump under the blankets. 
A fluff of black hair stuck out  — that was all. She smiled. He always did his best. If he 
was hungry and she was hungry and there was only an apple, he would take one bite and 
make her eat the rest. When he was awake, he always did his best.
    But when he was sleeping, he stole all the blankets.
    She went into the bathroom, shucked off her underpants, and turned on the shower.
She used the toilet while the water got warm and then stepped into the shower stall. The 
hot water hit her and she closed her eyes, smiling. Nothing in the world was any nicer 
than the first minute or two in a hot shower.
    (you were bad last night)
    A frown creased her brow.
    (No. Daddy said not.)
(lit that man's shoes on fire, bad girl, very bad, do you like teddy all black?)
    The frown deepened. Unease was now tinctured with fear and shame. The idea of her 
teddy bear never even fully surfaced; it was an underthought, and as so often happened, 
her guilt seemed to be summed up in a smell — a burned, charred smell. Smoldering 
cloth and stuffing. And this smell summoned hazy pictures of her mother and father
leaning over her, and they were big people, giants; and they were scared; they were
angry, their voices were big and crackling, like boulders jumping and thudding down a
mountainside in a movie.
    ('bad girl! very bad! you mustn't, Charlie! never! never! never!')    How old had she been then? Three? Two? How far back could a person remember? 
She had asked Daddy that once and Daddy said he didn't know. He said he remembered 
getting a bee sting and his mother had told him that happened when he was only fifteen
months old.
    This was her earliest memory: the giant faces leaning over her; the big voices like
boulders rolling downhill; and a smell like a burned waffle. That smell had been her hair. 
She had lit her own hair on fire and had burned nearly all of it off. It was after that that 
Daddy mentioned 'help' and Mommy got all funny, first laughing, then crying, then
laughing again so high and strange that Daddy had slapped her face. She remembered
that because it was the only time that she knew of that her daddy had done something like 
that to her mommy. Maybe we ought to think about getting 'help' for her, Daddy had said. 
They were in the bathroom and her head was wet because Daddy had put her in the 
shower. Oh, yes, her mommy had said, let's go see Dr. Wanless, he'll give us plenty of
'help,' just like he did before . . . then the laughing, the crying, more laughter, and the
slap.    (you were so BAD last night)
    'No,' she murmured in the drumming shower. 'Daddy said not. Daddy said it could
have . . . been . . . his . . . face.'
    (YOU WERE VERY BAD LAST NIGHT)
    But they had needed the change from the telephones. Daddy had said so.
    (VERY BAD!)
    And then she began to think about Mommy again, about the time when she had been
five, going on six. She didn't like to think about this but the memory was here now and 
she couldn't put it aside. It had happened just before the bad men had come and hurt
Mommy.
    (killed her, you mean, they killed her)
    yes, all right, before they  killed her, and took Charlie away. Daddy had taken her on his 
lap for storytime, only he hadn't had the usual storybooks about Pooh and Tigger and Mr. 
Toad and Willy Wonka's Great Glass  Elevator. Instead he had a number of thick books 
with no pictures. She had wrinkled her nose in distaste and asked for Pooh instead.
    'No, Charlie,' he had said. 'I want to read you some other stories, and I need you to 
listen. You're old enough now, I  think, and your mother thinks so, too. The stories may
scare you a little bit, but they're important. They're true stories.'
    She remembered the names of the books Daddy had read the stories from, because the 
stories  had scared her. There was a book called  Lo! by a man named Charles Fort. A 
book called Stranger Than Science by a man named Frank Edwards. A book called
Night's Truth. And there had been another book called  Pyrokinesis: A Case Book, but 
Mommy would not let Daddy read anything from that one. 'Later,' Mommy had said,
'when she's much older, Andy.' And then that book had gone away. Charlie had been
glad.
    The stories were scary, all right. One was about a man who had burned to death in a 
park. One was about a lady who had burned up in the living room of her trailer home, and 
nothing in the whole room had been burned but the lady and a little bit of the chair she 
had been sitting in while she watched TV. Parts of it had been too complicated for her to 
understand, but she remembered one thing:  a policeman saying: 'We have no explanation
for this fatality. There was nothing left of the victim but teeth and a few charred pieces of 
bone. It would have taken a blowtorch to do that to a person, and nothing around her was 
even charred. We can't explain why the whole place didn't go up like a rocket.'
    The third story had been about a big boy — he was eleven or twelve  — who had 
burned up while he was at the beach. His daddy had put him in the water, burning himself 
badly in the process, but the boy had still gone on burning until he was all burned up. 
And a story about a teenage girl who had burned up while explaining all her sins to the 
priest in the confession room. Charlie knew all about the Catholic confession room
because her friend Deenie had told her. Deenie said you had to tell the priest all the bad 
stuff you had done all week long. Deenie didn't go yet because she hadn't had first holy
communion, but her brother Carl did. Carl was in the fourth grade, and he had to tell
everything, even the time he sneaked into his mother's room and took some of her
birthday chocolates. Because if you didn't tell the priest, you couldn't be washed in THE
BLOOD OF CHRIST and you would go to THE HOT PLACE.
    The point of all these stories had not been lost on Charlie. She had been so frightened 
after the one about the girl in the confession room that she burst into tears. 'Am I going to burn myself up?' She wept. 'Like when I was little and caught my hair on fire? Am I
going to burn to pieces?'
    And Daddy and Mommy had looked upset. Mommy was pale and kept chewing at her 
lips, but Daddy had put an arm around her and said, 'No, honey. Not if you always
remember to be careful and not think about that . . . thing. That thing you do sometimes 
when you're upset and scared.'
    'What is it?' Charlie had cried. 'What is it, tell me what is it, I don't even know, I'll
never do it, I promise!'
    Mommy had said, 'As far as we can tell, honey, it's called pyrokinesis. It means being 
able to light fires sometimes just  by thinking about fires. It usually happens when people 
are upset. Some people apparently have that . . . that power all their lives and never even 
know it. And some people . . . well, the power gets hold of them for a minute and they . . 
.' She couldn't finish.
    'They burn themselves up,' Daddy had said. 'Like when you were little and caught your 
hair on fire, yes. But you can get control of that, Charlie. You  have to. And God knows it 
isn't your fault.' His eyes and Mommy's had met for a moment when he said that, and 
something had seemed to pass between them.
    Hugging her around the shoulders, he had said, 'Sometimes you can't help it, I know. 
It's an accident, like when you were smaller and you forget to go to the bathroom because 
you were playing and you wet your pants. We used to call that having an accident  — do 
you remember?'
    'I never do that anymore.'
    'No, of course you don't. And in a little while, you'll have control of this other thing in 
just the same way. But for now, Charlie, you've got to promise us that you'll  never never 
never get upset that way if you can help it. In that way that makes you start fires. And if 
you do, if you can't help it, push it  away from yourself. At a wastebasket or an ashtray. 
Try to get outside. Try to push it at water, if there's any around.'
    'But never at a person,' Mommy had said, and her face was still and pale and grave. 
'That would be very dangerous, Charlie. That would be a very bad girl. Because you
could'  — she struggled, forced the words up and out —  'you could kill a person.'
    And then Charlie had wept hysterically, tears of terror and remorse, because both of
Mommy's hands were bandaged, and she knew why Daddy had read her all the scary
stories. Because the day before, when Mommy told her she couldn't go over to Deenie's 
house because she hadn't picked up her room, Charlie had got  very angry, and suddenly 
the firething had been there, popping out of nowhere as it always did, like some evil jackin-the-box, nodding and grinning, and she had been so angry she had shoved it out of
herself and at her mommy and then Mommy's hands had been on fire. And it hadn't been 
too bad.
    (could have been worse could have been her face)
    because the sink had been full of soapy water for the dishes, it  hadn't been too bad, but 
it had been VERY BAD, and she had promised them both that she would  never never 
never
    The warm water drummed on her face, her chest, her shoulders, encasing her in a
warm envelope, a cocoon, easing away memories and care. Daddy had  told her it was all 
right. And if Daddy said a thing was so, it was. He was the smartest man in the world.
    Her mind turned from the past to the present, and she thought about the men who were chasing them. They were from the government, Daddy said, but not a good part of the 
government. They worked for a part of the government called the Shop. The men chased 
them and chased them. Everywhere they went, after a little while, those Shop men
showed up.
    I wonder how they'd like it if I set them on fire? a part of her asked coolly, and she 
squeezed her eyes shut in guilty horror. It was nasty to think that way. It was bad.
    Charlie reached out, grasped the HOT shower faucet, and shut it off with a sudden hard 
twist of her wrist. For the next two minutes she stood shivering and clutching her slight 
body under the ice-cold, needling spray, wanting to get out, not allowing herself to.
    When you had bad thoughts, you had to pay for them.
    Deenie had told her so.
2
Andy woke up a little at a time, vaguely aware of the drumming sound of the shower. At 
first it had been part of a dream: he was on Tashmore Pond with his grandfather and he 
was eight years old again, trying to get a squirming nightcrawler onto his hook without
sticking the hook into  his thumb. The dream had been incredibly vivid. He could see the 
splintery wicker creel in the bow of the boat, he could see the red tire patches on Granther 
McGee's old green boots, he could see his own old and wrinkled first baseman's mitt, and 
looking at it made him remember that he had Little League practice tomorrow at
Roosevelt Field. But this was tonight, the last light and the drawing dark balanced
perfectly on the cusp of twilight, the pond so still that you could see the small clouds of
midges and noseeums skimming over its surface, which was the colour of chrome. Heat 
lightning flashed intermittently . . . or maybe it was real lightening, because it was
raining. The first drops darkened the wood of Granther's dory, weatherbeaten white, in
penny-sized drops. Then you could hear it on the lake, a low and mysterious hissing
sound, like —
     — like the sound of a —
     — shower, Charlie must be in the shower.
    He opened his eyes and looked at an unfamiliar beamed ceiling. Where are we?
    It fell back into place a piece at a time, but there was an instant of frightened free-fall 
that came of having been in too many places over the last year, of having too many close 
shaves and being under too much pressure. He thought longingly of his dream and
wished he could be back in it with Granther McGee, who had been dead for twenty years 
now.
    Hastings Glen. He was in Hastings Glen. They were in Hastings Glen.    He wondered about his head. It hurt, but not like last night, when that bearded guy had 
let them off: The pain was down to a steady low throb. If this one followed previous
history, the throb would be just a faint ache by this evening, and entirely gone by
tomorrow.
    The shower was turned off:
    He sat up in bed and looked at his watch. It was quarter to eleven.    'Charlie?'
    She came back into the bedroom, rubbing herself vigorously with a towel.    'Good morning, Daddy.'
    'Good morning. How are you?'
    'Hungry,' she said. She went over to the chair where she had put her clothes and picked 
up the green blouse. Sniffed it. Grimaced. 'I need to change my clothes.'
    'You'll have to make do with those for a while, babe. We'll get you something later on 
today.'
    'I hope we don't have to wait that long to eat.'
    'We'll hitch a ride,' he said, 'and stop at the first cafe was come to.'
    'Daddy, when I started school, you told me never to ride with strangers.' She was into 
her underpants and green blouse, and was looking at him curiously.
    Andy got out of bed, walked over to her, and put his hands on her shoulders. 'The devil 
you don't know is sometimes better than the one you do,' he said. 'Do you know what that 
means, keed?'
    She thought about it carefully. The devil they knew was those men from the Shop, she 
guessed. The men that had chased them down the street in New York the day before. The 
devil they didn't know —
    'I guess it means that most people driving cars don't work for that Shop,' she said.
    He smiled back. 'You got it. And what I said before still holds, Charlie: when you get 
into a bad fix, you sometimes have to do things you'd never do if things were going
good.'
    Charlie's smile faded. Her face became serious, watchful. 'Like getting the money to
come out of the phones?'
    'Yes,' he said.
    'And it wasn't bad?'
    'No. Under the circumstances, it wasn't bad.'
    'Because when you get into a bad fix, you do what you have to do to get out of it.'
    'With some exceptions, yes.'
    'What are exceptions, Daddy?'
    He ruffled her hair. 'Never mind now, Charlie. Lighten up.'
    But she wouldn't. 'And I didn't mean to set that man's shoes on fire. I didn't do it on 
purpose.'
    'No, of course you didn't.'
    Then she did lighten up; her smile, so much like Vicky's, came out radiantly. 'How
does your head feel this morning, Daddy?'
    'Much better, thanks.'
    'Good.' She looked at him closely. 'Your eye looks funny.'
    'Which eye?'
    She pointed at his left. 'That one.'
    'Yeah?' He went into the bathroom and wiped a clear place on the steamed mirror.
    He looked at his eye for a long time, his good humor fading. His right eye looked just 
as it always had, a gray green  — the color of the ocean on an overcast spring day. His left 
eye was also gray green, but the white was badly bloodshot, and the pupil looked smaller 
than the right pupil. And the eyelid had a peculiar droop that he had never noticed before.
    Vicky's voice suddenly rang into his mind. It was so clear that she might have been
standing beside him.  The headaches, they scare me, Andy. You're doing something to 
yourself as well as to other people when you use that push or whatever you want to call it.
    The thought was followed by the image of a balloon being blown up . . . and up . . . 
and up . . . and finally exploding with a loud bang.
    He began to go over the left side of his face carefully, touching it everywhere with the 
tips of his right fingers. He looked like a man in a TV commercial marveling over the
closeness of his shave. He found three spots  — one below his left eye, one on his left 
cheekbone, and one just below the left temple  — where there was no feeling at all. Fright 
drifted through the hollow places in his body like quiet early-evening mist. The fright
was not so much for himself as it was for Charlie, for what would happen to her if she got 
left on her own.
    As if he had called her, he could see her beyond him in the mirror.    'Daddy?' She sounded a little scared. 'You okay?'
    'Fine,' he said. His voice sounded good. There was no tremor in it; nor was it too 
confident, falsely booming. 'Just thinking how much I need a shave.'
    She put a hand over her mouth and giggled. 'Scratchy like a Brillo pad. Yuck. Gross.'
    He chased her into the bedroom and rubbed his scratchy cheek against her smooth one. 
Charlie giggled and kicked.
3
As Andy was tickling his daughter with his stubbly beard, Orville Jamieson, aka OJ, aka 
The Juice, and another Shop agent named Bruce Cook were getting out of a light-blue 
Chevy outside the Hastings Diner.
    OJ paused for a moment, looking down Main Street with its slant parking, its appliance 
store, its grocery store, its two gas stations, its one drugstore, its wooden municipal
building with a plaque out front commemorating some historical event no one gave a shit
about. Main Street was also Route 40, and the McGees were not four miles from where 
OJ and Bruce Cook now stood.
    'Look at this burg,' OJ said, disgusted. 'I grew up close to here. Town called Lowville. 
You ever hear of Lowville, New York?'
    Bruce Cook shook his head.
    'It's near Utica, too. Where they make Utica Club beer. I was never so happy in my life 
as I was the day I got out of Lowville.' OJ reached under his jacket and readjusted The 
Windsucker in its holster.
    'There's Tom and Steve,'  Bruce said. Across the street, a light-brown Pacer had pulled 
into a parking slot just vacated by a farm truck. Two men in dark suits were getting out of 
the Pacer. They looked like bankers. Farther down the street, at the blinker light, two
more Shop people were talking to the old cunt that crossed the school kids at lunch time. 
They were showing her the picture and she was shaking her head. There were ten Shop 
agents here in Hastings Glen, all of them coordinating with Norville Bates, who was back 
in Albany waiting for Cap's personal ramrod, A1 Steinowitz.
    'Yeah, Lowville,' OJ sighed. 'I hope we get those two suckers by noon. And I hope my 
next assignment's Karachi. Or Iceland. Any place, as long as it's not upstate New York. 
This is too close to Lowville. Too close for comfort.'
    'You think we will have them by noon?' Bruce asked.    OJ shrugged. 'We'll have them by the time the sun goes down. You can count on that.'    They went into the diner, sat at the counter, and ordered coffee. A young waitress with 
a fine figure brought it to them.
    'How long you been on, sis?' OJ asked her.
    'If you got a sis, I pity her,' the waitress said. 'If there's any fambly resemblance, that 
is.'
    'Don't be that way, sis,' OJ said, and showed her his ID. She looked at it a long time. 
Behind her, an aging juvenile delinquent in a motorcycle jacket was pushing buttons on a 
Seeberg.
    'I been on since seven,' she said. 'Same as any other morning. Prolly you want to talk to 
Mike. He's the owner.' She started to turn away and OJ caught her wrist in a tight grip. He 
didn't like women who made fun of his looks. Most women were sluts anyway, his
mother had been right about that even if she hadn't been right about much else. And his 
mother surely would have known what to think about a high — tit bitch like this one.
    'Did I say I wanted to talk to the owner, sis?'
    She was starting to be frightened now, and that was okay with OJ. 'N-no.'
    'That's right. Because I want to talk to you, not to some guy that's  been out in the 
kitchen scrambling eggs and making Alpoburgers all morning.' He took the picture of
Andy and Charlie out of his pocket and handed it to her, not letting go of her wrist. 'You 
recognize them, sis? Serve them their breakfast this morning, maybe?'
    'Let go. You're hurting me.' All the color had gone out of her face except for the
whore's rouge she had tricked herself up with. Probably she had been a cheerleader in
high school. The kind of girl who laughed at Orville Jamieson when he asked them out 
because he had been president of the Chess Club instead of quarterback on the football
team. Bunch of cheap Lowville whores. God, he hated New York. Even New York City 
was too fucking close.
    'You tell me if you waited on them or if you didn't. Then I'll let go. Sis.'
    She looked briefly at the picture. 'No! I didn't. Now let — '
    'You didn't look long enough sis. You better look again.'
    She looked again. 'No! No!' she said loudly. 'I've never seen them! Let me go, can't 
you?'
    The elderly jd in the cut-rate Mammoth Mart leather jacket sauntered over, zippers
jingling, thumbs hooked in his pants pockets.
    'You're bothering the lady,' he said.
    Bruce Cook gazed at him with open, wide-eyed contempt. 'Be careful we don't decide 
to bother you next, pizza-face,' he said.
    'Oh,' the old kid in the leather jacket said, and his voice was suddenly very small. He 
moved away quickly, apparently remembering that he had pressing business on the street.
    Two old ladies in a booth were nervously watching the little scene at the counter. A big 
man in reasonably clean cook's whites  — Mike, the owner, presumably  — was standing 
in the kitchen doorway, also watching. He held a butcher knife in one hand, but he held it 
with no great authority.
    'What do you guys want?' he asked.
    'They're feds,' the waitress said nervously. 'They — '
    'Didn't serve them? You're sure?' OJ asked. 'Sis?'
    'I'm sure,' she said. She was nearly crying now.    'You better be. A mistake can get you five years in jail, sis.'
    'I'm sure,' she whispered. A tear spilled over the bottom curve of one eye and slipped 
down her cheek. 'Please let go. Don't hurt me anymore.'
    OJ squeezed tighter for one brief moment, liking the feel of the small bones moving
under  his hand, liking the knowledge that he could squeeze harder yet and snap them . . . 
and then he let go. The diner was silent except for the voice of Stevie Wonder coming
from the Seeberg, assuring the frightened patrons of the Hastings Diner that they could 
feel it all over. Then the two old ladies got up and left in a hurry.
    OJ picked up his coffee cup, leaned over the counter, poured the coffee on the floor, 
and then dropped the cup, which shattered. Thick china shrapnel sprayed in a dozen
different directions. The waitress was crying openly now.
    'Shitty brew,' OJ said.
    The owner made a halfhearted gesture with the knife, and OJ's face seemed to light up.
    'Come on, man,' he said, half-laughing. 'Come on. Let's see you try.'
    Mike put the knife down beside the toaster and suddenly cried out in shame and
outrage: 'I fought in Vietnam! My brother fought in Vietnam! I'm gonna write my
congressman about this! You wait and see if I don't!'
    OJ looked at him. After a while Mike lowered his eyes, scared.
    The two of them went out.
    The waitress scooched and began to pick up broken pieces of coffee cup, sobbing.
    Outside, Bruce said, 'How many motels?'
    'Three motels, six sets of tourist cabins,' OJ said, looking down toward the blinker. It 
fascinated him. In the Lowville of his youth there had been a diner with a plaque over the 
double Silex hotplate and that plaque had read IF YOU DON'T LIKE OUR TOWN,
LOOK FOR A TIMETABLE. How many times had he longed to pull that plaque off the 
wall and stuff' it down someone's throat?
    'There are people checking them out,' he said as they walked back toward their lightblue Chevrolet, part of a government motor pool paid for and maintained by tax dollars 
'We'll know soon now.'
4
John Mayo was with an agent named Ray Knowles.
They were on their way out along Route 40 to the Slumberland Motel. They were driving 
a late model tan Ford, and as they rode up the last hill separating them from an actual
view of the motel, a tire blew.
    'Shit-fire,' John said as the car began to pogo up and down and drag to the right. 'That's 
fucking government issue for you. Fucking retreads.' He pulled over onto the soft
shoulder and put on the Ford's four-way flashers. 'You go on,' he said. 'I'll change the 
goddam tire.'
    'I'll help,' Ray said. 'It won't take us five minutes.'
    'No, go on. It's right over this hill, should be.'
    'You sure?'
    'Yeah. I'll pick you up. Unless the spare's flat, too. It wouldn't surprise me.'
    A rattling farm truck passed them. It was the one OJ and Bruce Cook had seen leaving town as they stood outside the Hastings Diner.
    Ray grinned. 'It better not be. You'd have to put in a requisition in quadruplicate for a 
new one.'
    John didn't grin back. 'Don't I know it,' he said glumly.
    They went around to the trunk and Ray unlocked it. The spare was in good shape.
    'Okay,' John said. 'Go on.'
    'It really wouldn't take but five minutes to change that sucker.'
    'Sure, and those two aren't at that motel. But let's play it as if it were real. After all, 
they have to be somewhere.'
    'Yeah, okay.'
    John took the jack and spare out of the trunk. Ray Knowles watched him for a moment 
and then started walking along the shoulder toward the Slumberland Motel.
5
Just beyond the motel, Andy and Charlie McGee were standing on the soft shoulder of
Highway 40. Andy's worries that someone might notice he didn't have a car had proved 
groundless; the woman in the office was interested in nothing but the small Hitachi TV
on  the counter. A miniature Phil Donahue had been captured inside, and the woman was 
watching him avidly. She swept the key Andy offered into the mail slot without even
looking away from the picture.
    'Hope y'enjoyed y'stay,' she said. She was working on  a box of chocolate coconut
doughnuts and had got to the halfway mark.
    'Sure did,' Andy said, and left.
    Charlie was waiting for him outside. The woman had given him a carbon copy of his 
bill, which he stuffed into the side pocket of his cord jacket as he went down the steps. 
Change from the Albany pay phones jingled mutedly.
    'Okay, Daddy?' Charlie asked as they moved away toward the road.
    'Lookin good,' he said, and put an arm around her shoulders. To their right and back 
over the hill, Ray Knowles and John Mayo had just had their flat tire.    'Where are we going, Daddy?' Charlie asked.
    'I don't know,' he said.
    'I don't like it. I feel nervous.'
    'I think we're well ahead of them,' he said. 'Don't worry. They're probably still looking 
for the cab driver who took us to Albany.'
    But he was whistling past the graveyard; he knew it and probably Charlie did, too. Just 
standing here beside the road made him feel exposed, like a cartoon jailbird in a striped 
suit. Quit it, he told himself. Next thing you'll be thinking they're everywhere — one
behind every tree and a bunch of them right over the next hill. Hadn't somebody said that 
perfect paranoia and perfect awareness were the same thing?
    'Charlie — ' he began.
    'Let's go to Granther's,' she said.
    He looked at her, startled. His dream rushed back at him, the dream of fishing in the 
rain, the rain that had turned into the sound of Charlie's shower. 'What made you think of 
that?' he asked. Granther had died long before Charlie was born. He had lived his whole life in Tashmore, Vermont, a town just west of the New Hampshire border. When
Granther died, the place on the lake went to Andy's mother, and when she died, it came to 
Andy. The town would have taken it for back taxes long since, except that Granther had 
left a small sum in trust to cover them.
    Andy and Vicky had gone up there once a year during the summer vacation until
Charlie was born. It was twenty miles off the nearest two-lane road, in wooded,
unpopulated country. In the summer there were all sorts of people on Tashmore Pond,
which was really a lake with the small town of Bradford, New Hampshire, on the far side. 
But by this time of year all the summer camps would be empty. Andy doubted if the road 
in was even plowed in the winter.
    'I don't know,' Charlie said. 'It just . . . came into my mind. This minute.' On the other 
side of the hill, John Mayo was opening the trunk of the Ford and making his inspection
of the spare tire.
    'I dreamed about Granther this  morning,' Andy said slowly. 'First time I'd thought
about him in a year or more, I guess. So I suppose you could say he just came into my
head, too.'
    'Was it a good dream, Daddy?'
    'Yes,' he said, and smiled a little. 'Yes, it was.'
    'Well, what do you think?'
    'I think it's a great idea,' Andy said. 'We can go there and stay for a while and think 
about what we should do. How we should handle this. I was thinking if we could get to a 
newspaper and tell our story so that a lot of people knew about it, they'd have to lay off.'
    An old farm truck was rattling toward them, and Andy stuck out his thumb. On the
other side of the hill, Ray Knowles was walking up the soft shoulder of the road.
    The farm truck pulled over, and a guy wearing biballs  and a New York Mets baseball 
cap looked out.
    'Well there's a purty little miss,' he said, smiling. 'What's your name, missy?'
    'Roberta,' Charlie said promptly. Roberta was her middle name.
    'Well, Bobbi, where you headed this morning?' the driver asked.
    'We're on our way to Vermont,' Andy said. 'St. Johnsbury. My wife was visiting her
sister and she ran into a little problem.'
    'Did she now,' the farmer said, and said no more, but gazed at Andy shrewdly from the 
corners of his eyes.
    'Labor,' Andy said, and manufactured a wide smile. 'This one's got a new brother. Oneforty-one this morning.'
    'His name is Andy,' Charlie said. 'Isn't that a nice name?'
    'I think it's a corker,' the farmer said. 'You hop on in here and I'll get you ten miles 
closer to St. Johnsbury, anyhow.'
    They got in and the farm truck rattled and rumbled back onto the road, headed into the 
bright morning sunlight. At the same time, Ray Knowles was breasting the hill. He saw
an empty highway leading down to the Slumberland Motel. Beyond the Motel, he saw the 
farm truck that had passed
their car a few minutes ago just disappearing from view.
    He saw no need to hurry.6
The farmer's name was Manders  — Irv Manders. He had just taken a load of pumpkins 
into  town, where he had a deal with the fellow who ran the A&P. He told them that he 
used to deal with the First National, but the fellow over there just had no understanding
about pumpkins. A jumped-up meat cutter and no more, was the opinion of Irv Manders. 
The A&P manager, on the other hand, was a corker. He told them that his wife ran a 
touristy sort of shop in the summertime, and he kept a roadside produce stand, and
between the two of them they got along right smart.
    'You won't like me minding your beeswax,' Irv Manders told Andy, 'but you and your 
button here shouldn't be thumbin. Lord, no. Not with the sort of people you find ramming 
the roads these days. There's a Greyhound terminal in the drugstore back in Hastings
Glen. That's what you want.'
    'Well — ' Andy said. He was nonplussed, but Charlie stepped neatly into the breach.
    'Daddy's out of work,' she said brightly. 'That's why my mommy had to go and stay
with Auntie Em to have the baby. Auntie Em doesn't like Daddy. So we stayed at home. 
But now we're going to see Mommy. Right, Daddy?'
    'That's sort of private stuff, Bobbi,' Andy said, sounding uncomfortable. He felt
uncomfortable. There were a thousand holes in Charlie's story.
    'Don't you say another word,' Irv said. 'I know about trouble in families. It can get 
pretty bitter at times. And I know about being hard-up. It ain't no shame.'
    Andy cleared his throat but said nothing. He could think of nothing to say. They rode 
in silence for a while.
    'Say, why don't you two come home and take lunch with me and the wife?' Irv asked 
suddenly.
    'Oh no, we couldn't do — '
    'We'd be happy to,' Charlie said. 'Wouldn't we, Daddy?'
    He knew that Charlie's intuitions were usually good ones, and he was too mentally and 
physically worn down to go against her now. She was a self possessed and aggressive
little girl, and more than once Andy had wondered to himself just who was running this 
show.
    'If you're sure there's enough — ' he said.
    'Always enough,' Irv Manders said, finally  shifting the farm truck into third gear. They
were rattling between autumn-bright trees: maples, elms, poplars. 'Glad to have you.'
    'Thank you very much,' Charlie said.
    'My pleasure, button,' Irv said. 'Be my wife's, too, when she gets a look at you.'
    Charlie smiled.
    Andy rubbed his temples. Beneath the fingers of his left hand was one of those patches 
of skin where the nerves seemed to have died. He didn't feel good about this, somehow. 
That feeling that they were closing in was still very much with him.
7
The woman who had checked Andy out of the Slumberland Motel not twenty minutes
ago was getting nervous. She had forgotten all about Phil Donahue.    'You're sure this was the man,' Ray Knowles was saying for the third time. She didn't 
like this small, trim, somehow tight man. Maybe he worked for the government, but that 
was no comfort to Lena Cunningham. She didn't like his narrow face, she didn't like the 
lines around his cool blue eyes, and most of all she didn't like the way he kept  shoving 
that picture under her nose.
    'Yes, that was him,' she said again. 'But there was no little girl with him. Honest,
mister. My husband'll tell you the same. He works nights. It's got so we hardly ever see 
each other, except at supper. He'll tell — '
    The other man came back in, and with ever-mounting alarm, Lena saw that he had a 
walkie-talkie in one hand and a great big pistol in the other.
    'It was them,' John Mayo said. He was almost hysterical with anger and
disappointment. 'Two people  slept in that bed. Blond hairs on one pillow, black on the 
other. Goddam that flat tire! Goddam it all to hell! Damp towels hanging on the rod in the 
bathroom! Fucking shower's still dripping! We missed them by maybe five minutes,
Ray!'
    He jammed the pistol back into its shoulder holster.
    'I'll get my husband,' Lena said faintly.
    'Never mind,' Ray said. He took John's arm and led him outside. John was still
swearing about the flat. 'Forget the tire, John. Did you talk to OJ back in town?'
    'I  talked to him and he talked to Norville. Norville's on his way from Albany, and he's 
got Al Steinowitz with him. He landed not ten minutes ago.'
    'Well, that's good. Listen, think a minute, Johnny. They must have been hitching.'
    'Yeah, I guess so. Unless they boosted a car.'
    'The guy's an English instructor. He wouldn't know how to boost a candy bar out of a 
concession stand in a home for the blind. They were hitching, all right. They hitched from
Albany last night. They hitched this morning. I'd bet you this year's salary that they were 
standing there by the side of the road with their thumbs out while I was walking up that 
hill.'
    'If it hadn't been for that flat  — ' John's eyes were miserable behind his wire-framed 
glasses. He saw a promotion flapping away on slow, lazy wings.
    'Fuck the flat!' Ray said. 'What passed us? After we got the flat, what passed us?'
    John thought about it as he hooked the walkie-talkie back on his belt. 'Farm truck,' he 
said. 
    'That's what I remember, too,' Ray said. He glanced around and saw Lena
Cunningham's large moon face peering out the motel office window at them. She saw
him seeing her and the curtain fell back into place.
    'Pretty rickety truck,' Ray said. 'If they don't turn off the main road,  we ought to be able 
to catch up to them.'
    'Let's go, then,' John said. 'We can keep in touch with A1 and Norville by way of OJ on 
the walkie-talkie.'
    They trotted back to the car and got in. A moment later the tan Ford roared out of the 
parking lot, spewing white crushed gravel out from beneath its rear tires: Lena
Cunningham watched them go with relief. Running a motel was not what it once had
been.
    She went back to wake up her husband.8
As the Ford with Ray Knowles behind the wheel and John Mayo riding shotgun was
roaring down Route 40 at better than seventy miles an hour (and as a caravan of ten or 
eleven similar nondescript late-model cars were heading towards Hastings Glen from the 
surrounding areas of search), Irv Manders hand-signaled  left and turned off the highway
onto an unmarked stretch of tar-and-patch that headed roughly northeast. The truck
rattled and banged along. At his urging, Charlie had sung most of her nine-song 
repertoire, including such golden hits as 'Happy Birthday to  You,' 'This Old Man,' 'Jesus 
Loves Me,' and 'Camptown Races.' Irv and Andy both sang along with that one.
    The road twisted and wound its way over a series of increasingly wooded ridges and 
then began to descend toward flatter country that had been cultivated and harvested. Once 
a partridge burst from a cover of goldenrod and old hay at the left side of the road and Irv 
shouted, 'Get im, Bobbi!' and Charlie pointed her finger and chanted  'Bam-ba-DAM!'' and 
then giggled wildly.
    A few minutes later Irv turned off on a dirt road, and a mile farther along they came to 
a battered red, white, and blue mailbox with MANDERS stenciled on the side. Irv turned 
into a rutted driveway that was nearly half a mile long.
    'Must cost you an arm and a leg to keep it plowed in the winter,' Andy said.
    'Do it m'self,' Irv said.
    They came to a big white frame farmhouse, three stories tall and set off' with mintgreen trim. To Andy it looked like the sort of house that might have started off fairly
ordinary and then grown eccentric as the years passed. Two sheds were attached to the 
rear, one of them zigging thisaway, the other zagging thataway. On the south side, a
greenhouse wing had been added, and a big screened-in porch stood out from the north 
side like a stiff skirt.
    Behind the house was a red barn that had seen better days, and between the house and 
the barn was what New Englanders called a dooryard   — a flat dirt stretch of ground 
where a couple of dozen chickens clucked and strutted. When the truck rattled toward 
them they fled, squawking and fluttering their useless wings, past a chopping block with
an ax buried in it.
    Irv drove the truck into the barn, which had, a sweet hay smell Andy remembered from 
his summers in Vermont. When Irv switched the  truck off, they all heard a low, musical
mooing from somewhere deeper in the barn's shadowy interior.
    'You got a  cow,' Charlie said, and something like rapture came over her face. 'I can
hear it.'
    'We've got three,' Irv said. 'That's Bossy you hear — a very original name, wouldn't 
you say, button? She thinks she's got to be milked three times a day. You can see her 
later, if your daddy says you can.'
    'Can I, Daddy?'
    'I guess so,' Andy said, mentally surrendering. Somehow they had gone out beside the 
road to thumb a ride and had got shanghaied instead.
    'Come on in and meet the wife.'
    They strolled across the dooryard, pausing for Charlie to examine as many of the
chickens as she could get close to. The back door opened and a woman of about forty-five came out onto the back steps. She shaded her eyes and called, 'You there, Irv! Who 
you brought home?'
    Irv smiled. 'Well, the button here is Roberta. This fellow is her daddy. I didn't catch his 
name yet, so I dunno if we're related.'
    Andy stepped forward and said, 'I'm Frank Burton, ma'am. Your husband invited
Bobbi and me home for lunch, if that's all right. We're pleased to know you.'
    'Me too,' Charlie said, still more interested in the chickens than in the woman — at 
least for the moment.
    'I'm Norma Manders,' she said. 'Come in. You're welcome.' But Andy saw the puzzled 
look she threw at her husband.
    They all went inside, through an entryway where stovelengths were stacked head high 
and into a huge kitchen that was dominated by a woodstove and a long table covered with 
red and white checked oilcloth. There was an elusive smell of fruit and paraffin in the air. 
The smell of canning, Andy thought.
    'Frank here and his button are on their way to Vermont,' Irv said. 'I thought it wouldn't 
hurt em to get outside of a little hot food on their way.'
    'Of course not,' she agreed. 'Where is your car, Mr. Burton?'
    'Well — ' Andy began. He glanced at Charlie, but she was going to be no help; she was 
walking around the kitchen in small steps, looking at everything with a child's frank
curiosity.
    'Frank's had a little trouble,' Irv said, looking directly at his wife. 'But we don't have to 
talk about that. At least, not right now.'
    'All right,' Norma said. She had a sweet and direct face  — a handsome woman who 
was used to working hard. Her hands were red and chapped. 'I've got chicken and I could 
put together a nice salad. And there's lots of milk. Do you like milk, Roberta?'
    Charlie didn't look around. She's lapsed on the name, Andy thought. Oh, Jesus, this just 
gets better and better.
    'Bobbi!' he said loudly.
    She looked around then, and smiled a little too widely. 'Oh, sure,' she said. 'I love
milk.'
    Andy saw a warning glance pass from Irv to his wife:  No questions, not now. He felt a 
sinking despair. Whatever had been left of their story had just gone swirling away. But
there was nothing to do except sit down to lunch and wait to see what Irv Manders had on 
his mind.
9
'How far from the motel are we?' John Mayo asked.
    Ray glanced down at the odometer. 'Seventeen miles,' he said, and pulled over. 'That's  
—  far enough.'
    'But maybe — '
    'No, if we were going to catch them, we would have by now. We'll go on back and 
rendezvous with the others.'
    John struck the heel of his hand against the dashboard. 'They turned off somewhere,' he 
said. 'That goddam flat shoe! This job's been bad luck from the start, Ray. An egghead and a little girl. And we keep missing them.'
    'No, I think we've got them,' Ray said, and took out his walkie-talkie. He pulled the 
antenna and tipped it out the window. 'We'll have a cordon around the whole area in half 
an hour. And I bet we don't hit a dozen houses before someone around here recognizes 
that truck. Late-sixties dark-green International Harvester, snowplow attachment on the
front, wooden stakes around the truck bed to hold on a high load. I still think we'll have 
them by dark.'
    A moment later he was talking to A1 Steinowitz, who was nearing the Slumberland 
Motel. A1 briefed his agents in turn. Bruce Cook remembered the farm truck from town. 
OJ did, too. It had been parked in front of the A&P.
    A1 sent them back to town, and half an hour later they all knew that the truck that had 
almost certainly stopped to give the two fugitives a lift belonged to Irving Manders, RFD
5, Baillings Road, Hastings Glen, New York.
    It was just past twelve-thirty P.M.
10
The lunch was very nice, Charlie ate like a horse  — three helpings of chicken with gravy, 
two of Norma Manders's hot biscuits, a side dish of salad, and three of her home-canned 
dill pickles. They finished off with slices of apple pie garnished with wedges of cheddar
— Irv offering his opinion that 'Apple pie without a piece of cheese is like a smooch
without a squeeze.' This earned him an affectionate elbow in the side from his wife. Irv
rolled his eyes, and Charlie laughed. Andy's appetite surprised him. Charlie belched and
then covered her mouth guiltily.
    Irv smiled at her. 'More room out than there is in, button.'
    'If I eat any more, I think I'll split,' Charlie answered. 'That's what my mother always 
used to . . . I mean, that's what she always says.'
    Andy smiled tiredly.
    'Norma,' Irv said, getting up, 'why don't you and Bobbi go on  out and feed those
chickens?'
    'Well, lunch is still spread over half an acre,' Norma said.
    'I'll pick up lunch,' Irv said. 'Want to have a little talk with Frank, here.'
    'Would you like to feed the chickens, honey?' Norma asked Charlie.    'I sure would.' Her eyes were sparkling.
    'Well, come on then. Do you have a jacket? It's turned a bit chilly.'
    'Uh . . .' Charlie looked at Andy.
    'You can borrow a sweater of mine,' Norma said. That look passed between her and Irv 
again. 'Roll the sleeves up a little bit and it will be fine.' 
    'Okay.'
    Norma got an old and faded warmup jacket from the entryway and a frayed white
sweater that Charlie floated in, even with the cuff's turned up three or four times.
    'Do they peck?' Charlie asked a little nervously.
    'Only their food, honey.'
    They went out and the door closed behind them. Charlie was still chattering. Andy
looked at Irv Manders, and Irv looked back calmly.    'You want a beer, Frank?'
    'It isn't Frank,' Andy said. 'I guess you know that.'
    'I guess I do. What is your handle?'
    Andy said, 'The less you know, the better off you are.'
    'Well, then,' Irv said, 'I'll just call you Frank.'
    Faintly, they heard Charlie squeal with delight from outside. Norma said something,
and Charlie agreed.
    'I guess I could use a beer,' Andy said.
    'Okay.'
    Irv got two Utica Clubs from the refrigerator, opened them, set Andy's on the table and 
his on the counter. He got an apron from a hook by the sink and put it on.  The apron was 
red and yellow and the hem was flounced, but somehow he managed to avoid looking
silly.
    'Can I help you?' Andy asked.
    'No, I know where everything goes,' Irv said.  'Most everything, anyhow. She changes 
things from week to week. No woman wants a man to feel  right at home in her kitchen. 
They like help, sure, but they feel better if you have to ask them where to put the
casserole dish or where they put the Brillo.'
    Andy, remembering his own days as Vicky's kitchen apprentice, smiled and nodded.
    'Meddling around in other folk's business isn't my strong point,' Irv said, drawing water 
in the kitchen sink and adding detergent. 'I'm a farmer, and like I told you, my wife runs a 
little curio shop down where Baillings Road crosses the Albany Highway. We've been
here almost twenty years.'
    He glanced back at Andy.
    'But I knew there was somethin wrong from the minute I saw you two standing by the 
road back there. A grown man and a little girl just aren't the kind of pair you usually see 
hitching the roads. Know what I mean?'
    Andy nodded and sipped his beer.
    'Furthermore, it looked to me like you'd just come out of the Slumberland, but you had 
no traveling gear, not so much as an overnight case. So I just about decided to pass you 
by. Then I stopped. Because . . . well, there's a difference between not meddling in other 
folks' business and seeing something that looks damn bad and turning a blind eye to it.'
    'Is that how we look to you? Damn bad?'
    'Then,' Irv said, 'not now'. He was washing the old mismatched dishes carefully,
stacking them in the drainer. 'Now I don't know just what to make of you two. My first 
thought was it must be you two the cops are looking for.' He saw the change come over 
Andy's face and the sudden way Andy set his beer can down. 'I guess it is you,' he said 
softly. 'I was hopin it wasn't.'
    'What cops?' Andy asked harshly.
    'They've got all the main roads blocked off coming in and out of Albany,' Irv said. 'If 
we'd gone another six miles up Route Forty, we would have run on one of those blocks 
right where Forty crosses Route Nine.'
    'Well, why didn't you just go ahead?' Andy asked. 'That would have been the end of it 
for you. You would have been out of it.'
    Irv was starting on the pots now, pausing to hunt through the cupboards over the sink. 
'See what I was saying? I can't find the gloriosky Brillo . . . Wait, here it is . . . Why didn't I just take you up the road to the cops? Let's say I wanted to satisfy my own natural
curiosity.'
    'You have some questions, huh?'
    'All kinds of them,' Irv said. 'A grown man and a little girl hitching rides, the little girl 
hasn't got any overnight case, and the cops are after them. So I have an idea. It isn't so 
farfetched. I think that maybe here's a daddy who wanted custody of his button and
couldn't get it. So he snatched her.'
    'It sounds pretty farfetched to me.'
    'Happens all the time, Frank. And I think to myself, the mommy didn't like that so well 
and, swore out a warrant on the  daddy. That would explain all the roadblocks. You only 
get coverage like that for a big robbery . . . or a kidnapping.'
    'She's my daughter, but her mother didn't put the police on us,' Andy said. 'Her mother 
has been dead for a year.'
    'Well, I'd already kind of shitcanned the idea,' Irv said. 'It don't take a private eye to see 
the two of you are pretty close. Whatever else may be going on, it doesn't appear you've 
got her against her will.'
    Andy said nothing.
    'So here we are at my problem,' Irv said. 'I picked the two of you up because I thought 
the little girl might need help. Now I don't know where I'm at. You don't strike me as the 
desperado type. But all the same, you and your little girl are going under false names,
you're telling a story that's just as thin as a piece of tissue paper, and you look sick, Frank. 
You look just about as sick as a man can get and still stay on his feet. So those are my 
questions. Any you could answer, it might be a good thing.'
    'We came to Albany from New York and hitched a ride to Hastings Glen early this 
morning,' Andy said. 'It's bad to know they're here, but I think I knew it. I think Charlie 
knew it, too.' He had mentioned Charlie's name, and that was a mistake, but at this point 
it didn't seem to matter.
    'What do they want you for, Frank?'
    Andy thought for a long time, and then he met Irv's frank gray eyes. He said: 'You
came from town, didn't you? See any strange people there? City types? Wearing these
neat, off-the-rack suits that you forget almost as soon as the guys wearing them are out of 
sight? Driving late-model cars that sort of just fade into the scenery?'    It was Irv's turn to think. 'There were two guys like that in the A&P,' he said. 'Talking 
to Helga. She's one of the checkers. Looked like they were showing her something.'
    'Probably our picture,' Andy said. 'They're government agents. They're working with
the police, Irv. A more accurate way of putting it would be that the police are working for 
them. The cops don't know why we're wanted.'
    'What sort of government agency are we talking about? FBI?'
    'No. The Shop.'
    'What? That CIA outfit?' Irv looked frankly disbelieving.
    'They don't have anything at all to do with the CIA,' Andy said. 'The Shop is really the 
DSI   —  Department of Scientific Intelligence. I read in an article about three years ago 
that some wiseacre nicknamed it the Shop in the early sixties, after a science-fiction story 
called `The Weapon Shops of Ishtar.' By a guy named van Vogt, I think, but that doesn't 
matter. What they're supposed to be involved in are domestic scientific projects which
may have present or future application to matters bearing on national security. Thatdefinition is from their charter, and the thing they're most associated with in the public
mind is the energy research they're funding and supervising — electromagnetic stuff' and 
fusion power. They're actually involved in a lot more. Charlie and I are part of an
experiment that happened a long time ago. It happened before Charlie was even born. Her 
mother was also involved. She was murdered. The Shop was responsible.'    Irv was silent for a while. He let the dishwater out of the sink, dried his hands, and then 
came over and began to wipe the oilcloth that covered the table. Andy picked up his beer 
can.
    'I won't say flat out that I don't believe you,' Irv said finally. 'Not with some of the
things that have gone on under cover in this country and then come out. CIA guys giving
people drinks spiked with LSD and some FBI agent accused of killing people during the 
Civil Rights marches and money in brown bags and all of that. So I can't say right out 
that I don't believe you. Let's just say you haven't convinced me yet.'    'I don't think it's even me that they really want  anymore,' Andy said. 'Maybe it was, 
once. But they've shifted targets. It's Charlie they're after now.'
    'You mean the national government is after a first- or second-grader for reasons of
national security?'
    'Charlie's no ordinary second-grader,' Andy said. 'Her mother and I were injected with 
a drug which was coded Lot Six. To this day I don't know exactly what it was. Some sort 
of synthetic glandular secretion would be my best guess. It changed the chromosomes of
myself and of the lady I later married. We passed those chromosomes on to Charlie, and 
they mixed in some entirely new way. If she could pass them on to her children, I guess 
she'd be called a mutant. If for some reason she can't, or if the change has caused her to 
be sterile, I guess she'd be called a sport or a mule. Either way, they want her. They want 
to study her, see if they can figure out what makes her able to do what she can do. And 
even more, I think they want her as an exhibit. They want to use her to reactivate the Lot 
Six program.'
    'What is it she can do?' Irv asked.
    Through the kitchen window they could see Norma and Charlie coming out of the
barn. The white sweater flopped and swung around Charlie's body, the hem coming down 
to her calves. There was high color in her cheeks, and she was talking to Norma, who was 
smiling and nodding.
    Andy said softly, 'She can light fires.'
    'Well, so can I,' Irv said. He sat down again and was looking at Andy in a peculiar, 
cautious way. The way you look at people you suspect of madness. 
    'She can do it simply by thinking about it,' Andy said. 'The technical name for it is
pyrokinesis. It's a psi talent, like telepathy, telekinesis, or precognition — Charlie has a 
dash of some of those as well, by the way  — but pyrokinesis is much rarer . . . and much 
more dangerous. She's very much afraid of it, and she's right to be. She can't always
control it. She could burn up your house, your barn, or your front yard if she set her mind 
to it. Or she could light your pipe.' Andy smiled wanly. 'Except that while she was
lighting your pipe, she might also burn up your house, your barn, and your front yard.'
    Irv finished his beer and said, 'I think you ought to call the police and turn yourself in, 
Frank. You need help.'
    'I guess it sounds pretty nutty, doesn't it?'
    'Yes,' Irv said gravely. 'It sounds nutty as anything I ever heard.' He was sitting lightly, slightly tense on his chair, and Andy thought, He's expecting me to do something loony 
the first chance I get.
    'I suppose it doesn't matter much anyway,' Andy said. 'They'll be here soon enough. I 
think the police would actually be better. At least you don't turn into an unperson as soon 
as the police get their hands on you.'
    Irv started to reply, and then the door opened. Norma and Charlie came in. Charlie's 
face was bright, her eyes sparkling. 'Daddy!' she said. 'Daddy, I fed the — '
    She broke off. Some of the color left her cheeks, and she looked narrowly from Irv
Manders to her father and back to Irv again. Pleasure faded from her face and was
replaced with a look of harried misery. The way she looked last night, Andy thought.  The 
way she looked yesterday when I grabbed her out of school. It goes on and on, and 
where's the happy ending for her?
    'You told,' she said. 'Oh Daddy, why did you tell?'
    Norma stepped forward and put a protective arm around Charlie's shoulders. 'Irv,
what's going on here?'
    'I don't know,' Irv said. 'What do you mean he told, Bobbi?'
    'That's not my name,' she said. Tears had appeared in her eyes. 'You know that's not 
my name.'
    'Charlie,' Andy said. 'Mr. Manders knew something was wrong. I told him, but he
didn't believe me. When you think about it, you'll understand why.'
    'I don't understand anyth  — ' Charlie began, her  voice rising stridently. Then she was 
quiet. Her head cocked sideways in a peculiar listening gesture, although as far as any of
the others could tell there was nothing to listen to. As they watched, Charlie's face simply 
drained of color; it was like watching some rich liquid poured out of a pitcher.
    'What's the matter, honey?' Norma asked, and cast a worried glance at Irv.
    'They're coming, Daddy,' Charlie whispered.
    Her eyes were wide circles of fear. 'They're coming for us.'
11
They had rendezvoused at the corner of Highway 40 and the unnumbered blacktop road 
Irv had turned down — on the Hastings Glen town maps it was marked as the Old
Baillings Road. Al Steinowitz had finally caught up with the rest of his men and had
taken over quickly and decisively. There were sixteen of them in five cars. Heading up
the road toward Irv Mander's place, they looked like a fast-moving funeral procession.
    Norville Bates had handed over the reins  — and the responsibility  — of the operation 
to A1 with genuine relief and with a question about the local and state police who had 
been rung in on the operation.
    'We're keeping this one dark for now,' A1 said. 'If we get them, we'll tell them they can 
fold their roadblocks. If we don't, we'll tell them to start moving in toward the centre of 
the circle. But between you and me, if we can't handle them with sixteen men, we can't 
handle them, Norv.'
    Norv sensed the mild rebuke and said no more. He knew it would be best to take the 
two of them with no outside interference, because Andrew McGee was going to have an 
unfortunate accident as soon as they got him. A fatal accident. With no bluesuits hangingaround, it could happen that much sooner.
    Ahead of him and Al, the brakelights of OJ's car flashed briefly, and then the car
turned onto a dirt road. The others followed.

12
'I don't understand any of this,' Norma said. 'Bobbi . . . Charlie . . . can't you calm down?'
    'You don't understand,' Charlie said. Her voice was high and strangled. Looking at her 
made Irv jumpy. Her face was like that of a rabbit caught in a snare. She pulled free of
Norma's arm and ran to her father, who put his hands on her shoulders.    'I think they're going to kill you, Daddy,' she said.
    'What?'
    'Kill you,' she repeated. Her eyes were staring and glazed with panic. Her mouth
worked frantically. 'We have to run. We have to — '
    Hot. Too hot in here.
    He glanced to his left. Mounted on the wall between the stove and the sink was an
indoor thermometer, the kind that can be purchased from any mail  — order catalogue. At 
the bottom of this one, a plastic red devil with a pitchfork was grinning and mopping his 
brow. The motto beneath his cloven hooves read: HOT ENOUGH FOR YA?
    The mercury in the thermometer was slowly rising, an accusing red finger.
    'Yes, that's what they want to do,' she said. 'Kill you, kill you like they did Mommy, 
take me away, I won't, I won't let it happen, I won't let it — ' 
    Her voice was rising. Rising like the column of mercury.
    'Charlie! Watch what you're doing!'
    Her eyes cleared a little. Irv and his wife had drawn together.
    'Irv . . . what — '
    But Irv had seen Andy's glance at the thermometer, and suddenly he believed. It was 
hot in here now. Hot enough to sweat. The mercury in the thermometer stood just above 
ninety degrees.
    'Holy Jesus Christ,' he said hoarsely. 'Did she do that, Frank?'
    Andy ignored him. His hands were still on Charlie's shoulders. He looked into her
eyes. 'Charlie — do you think it's too late? How does it feel to you?'
    'Yes,' she said. All the color was gone from her face. 'They're coming up the dirt road 
now. Oh Daddy, I'm scared.'
    'You can stop them, Charlie,' he said quietly.
    She looked at him.
    'Yes,' he said.
    'But — Daddy — it's bad. I know it is. I could kill them.'
    'Yes,' he said. 'Maybe now it's kill or be killed. Maybe it's come down to that.'
    'It's not bad?' Her voice was almost inaudible.
    'Yes,' Andy said. 'It is. Never kid yourself that it isn't. And don't do it if you can't 
handle it, Charlie. Not even for me.'
    They looked at each other, eye to eye, Andy's eyes tired and bloodshot and frightened, 
Charlie's eyes wide, nearly hypnotized.
    She said: 'If I do . . . something . . . will you still love me?'    The question hung between them, lazily revolving.
    'Charlie,' he said, 'I'll always love you. No matter what.'
    Irv had been at the window and now he crossed the room to them. 'I think I got some 
tall apologizing to do,' he said. 'There's a whole line of cars coming up the road. I'll stand 
with you, if you want. I got my deer gun.' But he looked suddenly frightened, almost sick.
    Charlie said: 'You don't need your gun.'
    She slipped out from under her father's hands and walked across to the screen door, in 
Norma Manders's knitted white sweater looking even smaller than she was. She let
herself out.
    After a moment, Andy found his feet and went after her. His stomach felt frozen, as if 
he'd just gobbled a huge Dairy Queen cone in three bites. The Manderses stayed behind. 
Andy caught one last look at the man's baffled, frightened face, and a random thought —
that'll teach you to pick up hitchhikers — darted across his consciousness.
    Then he and Charlie were on the porch, watching the first of the cars turn up the long 
driveway. The hens squawked and fluttered. In the barn, Bossy mooed again for someone 
to come and milk her. And thin October sunshine lay over the wooded ridges and
autumn-brown fields of this small upstate-New York town. It had been almost a year of
running, and Andy was surprised to find an odd sense of relief mixed in with his sharp
terror. He had heard that in its extremity, even a rabbit will sometimes turn and face the 
dogs, driven back to some earlier, less meek nature at the instant before it must be torn 
apart.
    At any rate, it was good not to be running. He stood with Charlie, the sunshine mellow 
on her blond hair.
    'Oh Daddy,' she moaned. 'I can't hardly stand up.'
    He put his arm around her shoulders and pulled her more tightly against his side.
    The first car stopped at the head of the dooryard and two men got out.
13
'Hi, Andy,' A1 Steinowitz said, and smiled. 'Hi, Charlie.' His hands were empty, but his 
coat was open. Behind him the other  man stood alertly by the car, hands at his sides. The 
second car stopped behind the first and four more men spilled out. All the cars were
stopping, all the men getting out. Andy counted a dozen and then stopped counting.
    'Go away,' Charlie said. Her voice was thin and high in the cool early afternoon.
    'You've led us a merry chase,' A1 said to Andy. He looked at Charlie. 'Honey, you
don't have to — '
    'Go away!' she screamed.
    A1 shrugged and smiled disarmingly. 'Fraid I can't do that, honey.  I have my orders. 
No one wants to hurt you or your daddy.'
    'You liar! You're s'posed to kill him! I know it!'
    Andy spoke and was a little surprised to find that his voice was completely steady. 'I 
advise you to do as my daughter says. You've surely been briefed enough to know why 
she's wanted. You know about the soldier at the airport.'
    OJ and Norville Bates exchanged a sudden uneasy look.
    'If you'll just get in the car, we can discuss all of this,' A1 said. 'Honest to gosh, there's nothing going on here except — '    'We know what's going on,' Andy said.
    The men who had been in the last two or three cars were beginning to fan out and
stroll, almost casually toward the porch.
    'Please,' Charlie said to the man with the strangely yellow face. 'Don't make me do
anything.'
    'It's no good, Charlie,' Andy said.
    Irv Manders came out onto the porch. 'You men are trespassing,' he said. 'I want you to 
get the hell off my property.'
    Three of the Shop men had come up the front steps of the porch and were now
standing less than ten yards away from Andy and Charlie, to their left. Charlie threw
them a warning, desperate glance and they stopped — for the moment.
    'We're government agents, sir,' A1 Steinowitz said to Irv in a low, courteous voice. 
'These two folks are wanted for questioning. Nothing more.'
    'I don't care if they're wanted for assassinating the President,' Irv said. His voice was 
high, cracking. 'Show me your warrant or get the Christ off my property.'
    'We don't need a warrant,' Al said. His voice was edged with steel now.
    'You do unless I woke up in Russia this morning,' Irv said. 'I'm telling you to get off, 
and you better get high-steppin, mister. That's my last word on it.'
    'Irv, come inside!' Norma cried.
    Andy could feel something building in the air, building up around Charlie like an
electric charge. The hair on his arms suddenly began to stir and move, like kelp in an
invisible tide. He looked down at her and saw her face, so small, now so strange.
    It's coming, he thought helplessly. It's coming, oh my God it really is.
    'Get out!' he shouted at Al. 'Don't you understand what she's going to do? Can't you 
feel it? Don't be a fool, man!'
    'Please,' Al said. He looked at the three men standing at the far end of the porch and 
nodded to them imperceptibly. He looked back at Andy. 'If we can only discuss this — '
    'Watch it, Frank!' Irv Manders screamed.
    The three men at the end of the porch suddenly charged at them, pulling their guns as 
they came. 'Hold it, hold it!' one of them yelled. 'Just stand still! Hands over your — '
    Charlie turned toward them. As she did so, half a dozen other men, John Mayo and 
Ray Knowles among them, broke for the porch's back steps with their guns drawn.
   Charlie's eyes widened a little, and Andy felt something hot pass by him in a warm
puff of air.
    The three men at the front end of the porch had got halfway toward them when their 
hair caught on fire.
    A gun boomed, deafeningly loud, and a splinter of wood perhaps eight inches long
jumped from one of the porch's supporting posts. Norma Manders screamed, and Andy
flinched. But Charlie seemed not to notice. Her face was dreamy and thoughtful. A small
Mona Lisa smile had touched the corners of her mouth.
    She's enjoying this, Andy thought with something like horror. Is that why she's so
afraid of it? Because she likes it?
    Charlie was turning back toward Al Steinowitz again. The three men he had sent
running down toward Andy and Charlie from the front end of the porch had forgotten
their duty to God, country, and the Shop. They were beating at the flames on their heads and yelling. The pungent smell of fried hair suddenly filled the afternoon.
    Another gun went off. A window shattered.
    'Not the girl!' A1 shouted. 'Not the girl!'
    Andy was seized roughly. The porch swirled with a confusion of men. He was dragged 
toward the railing through the chaos. Then someone tried to pull him a different way. He 
felt like a tug-of-war rope.
    'Let him go!' Irv Manders shouted, bull throated. 'Let him — '
    Another gun went off and suddenly Norma was screaming again, screaming her
husband's name over and over.
    Charlie was looking down at Al Steinowitz, and suddenly the cold, confident look was 
gone from Al's face and he was in terror. His yellow complexion grew positively cheesy.
    'No, don't,' he said in an almost conversational tone of voice. 'Don't — '
    It was impossible to tell where the flames began Suddenly his pants and his sportcoat 
were blazing. His hair was a burning bush. He backed up, screaming, bounced off the
side of his car, and half turned to Norville Bates, his arms stretched out.
    Andy felt that soft rush of heat again, a displacement of air, as if a hot slug thrown at 
rocket speed had just passed his nose.
    Al Steinowitz's face caught on fire.
    For a moment he was all there, screaming silently under a transparent caul of flame,
and then his features were blending, merging, running like tallow. Norville shrank away
from him. Al Steinowitz was a flaming scarecrow. He staggered blindly down the
driveway, waving his arms, and then collapsed facedown beside the third car. He didn't
look like a man at all; he looked like a burning bundle of rags.
    The people on the porch had frozen, staring dumbly at this unexpected blazing
development. The three men whose hair Charlie had fired had all managed to put
themselves out. They were all going to look decidedly strange in the future (however
short that might be); their hair, short by regulation, now looked like blackened, tangled
clots of ash on top of their heads.
    'Get out,' Andy said hoarsely. 'Get out quickly. She's never done anything like this
before and I don't know if she can stop.'
    'I'm all right, Daddy,' Charlie said. Her voice was calm, collected, and strangely
indifferent. 'Everything's okay.'
    And that was when the cars began to explode.
    They all went up from the rear; later, when Andy replayed the incident at the Manders 
farm in his mind, he was quite sure of that. They all went up from the rear, where the gas 
tanks were.
    Al's light-green Plymouth went first, exploding with a muffled whrrr-rump! sound. A
ball of flame rose from the back of the Plymouth, too bright to look at. The rear window 
blew in. The Ford John and Ray had come in went next, barely two seconds later. Hooks 
of metal whickered through the air and pattered on the roof.
    'Charlie!' Andy shouted. 'Charlie, stop it!'
    She said in that same calm voice: 'I can't.'
    The third car went up.
    Someone ran. Someone else followed him. The men on the porch began to back away. 
Andy was tugged again, he resisted, and suddenly no one at all was holding him. And
suddenly they were all running, their faces white, eyes stare-blind with panic. One of the men with the charred hair tried to vault over the railing, caught his foot, and fell headfirst 
into a small side garden where Norma had grown beans earlier in the year. The stakes for 
the beans to climb on were still there, and one of them rammed through this fellow's
throat and came out the other side with a wet punching sound that Andy never forgot. He 
twitched in the garden like a landed trout, the bean-pole protruding from his neck like the 
shaft of an arrow, blood gushing down the front of his shirt as he made weak gargling
founds.
    The rest of the cars went up then like an ear shattering string of firecrackers. Two of 
the fleeing men were tossed aside like ragdolls by the concussion, one of them on fire
from the waist down, the other peppered with bits of safety glass.
    Dark, oily smoke rose in the air. Beyond the driveway, the far hills and fields twisted 
and writhed through the heat-shimmer as if recoiling in horror. Chickens ran madly
everywhere, clucking crazily. Suddenly three of them exploded into flame and went
rushing off, balls of fire with feet, to collapse on the far side of the dooryard.
    'Charlie, stop it right now! Stop it!'
    A trench of fire raced across the dooryard on a diagonal, the very dirt blazing in a
single  straight line, as if a train of gunpowder had been laid. The flame reached the
chopping block with Irv's ax buried in it, made a fairy-ring around it, and suddenly
collapsed inward. The chopping block whooshed into flame.
    'CHARLIE FOR CHRIST'S SAKE!'
   Some Shop agent's pistol was lying on the verge of grass between the porch and the 
blazing line of cars in the driveway. Suddenly the cartridges in it began to go off in a
series of sharp, clapping explosions. The gun jigged and flipped bizarrely in the grass.
    Andy slapped her as hard as he could.
    Her head rocked back, her eyes blue and vacant. Then she was looking at him,
surprised and hurt and dazed, and he suddenly felt enclosed in a capsule of swiftly
building heat. He took in a breath of air that felt like heavy glass. The hairs in his nose 
felt as if they were crisping.
    Spontaneous combustion, he thought. I'm going up in a burst of spontaneous
combustion —
    Then it was gone.
    Charlie staggered on her feet and put her hands up to her face. And then, through her 
hands, came a shrill, building scream of such horror and dismay that Andy feared her
mind had cracked.
    'DAAAAADEEEEEEEEE — '
    He swept her into his arms, hugged her.
    'Shhh,' he said. 'Oh Charlie, honey, shhhh.'
    The scream stopped, and she went limp in his arms. Charlie had fainted.
14
Andy picked her up in his arms and her head rolled limply against his chest. The air was 
hot and rich with the smell of burning gasoline. Flames had already crawled across the
lawn to the ivy trellis; fingers of fire began to climb the ivy with the agility of a boy on
midnight business. The house was going to go up.    Irv Manders was leaning against the kitchen screen door, his legs splayed. Norma knelt beside him. He had been  shot above the elbow, and the sleeve of his blue workshirt was a 
bright red. Norma had torn a long strip of her dress off' at the hem and was trying to get 
his shirtsleeve up so she could bind the wound. Irv's eyes were open. His face was an
ashy gray, his lips were faintly blue, and he was breathing fast.
    Andy took a step toward them and Norma Manders flinched backward, at the same
time placing her body over her husband's. She looked up at Andy with shiny, hard eyes.
    'Get away,' she hissed. 'Take your monster and get away.'
15
OJ ran.
    The Windsucker bounced up and down under his arm as he ran. He ignored the road as 
he ran. He ran in the field. He fell down and got up and ran on. He twisted his ankle in
what might have been a chuckhole and fell down again, a scream jerking out of his mouth 
as he sprawled. Then he got up and ran on. At times it seemed that he was running alone, 
and at times it seemed that someone was running with him. It didn't matter. All that
mattered was getting away, away  from that blazing bundle of rags that had been A1
Steinowitz ten minutes before, away from that burning train of cars, away from Bruce
Cook who lay in a small garden patch with a stake in his throat. Away, away, away. The 
Windsucker fell out of its holster, struck his knee painfully, and fell in a tangle of weeds, 
forgotten. Then OJ was in a patch of woods. He stumbled over a fallen tree and sprawled 
full length. He lay there, breathing raggedly, one hand pressed to his side, where a painful 
stitch had formed. He lay weeping tears of shock and fear. He thought: No more
assignments in New York. Never. That's it. Everybody out of the pool. I'm never setting 
foot in New York again even if I live to be two hundred.
    After a little while OJ got up and began to limp toward the road.
16
'Let's get him off the porch,' Andy said. He had laid Charlie on the grass beyond the
dooryard. The side of the house was burning now, and sparks were drifting down on the 
porch like big, slow-moving fireflies.
    'Get away,'' she said harshly. 'Don't touch him.'
    'The house is burning,' Andy said. 'Let me help you.'
    'Get away! You've done enough!'
    'Stop it, Norma.' Irv looked at her. 'None of what happened was this man's fault. So 
shut your mouth.'
    She looked at  him as if she had a great many things to say, and then shut her mouth
with a snap.
    'Get me up,' Irv said. 'Legs feel all rubber. Think maybe I pissed myself. Shouldn't be 
surprised. One of those bastards shot me. Don't know which one. Lend a hand, Frank.'
    'It's Andy,' he said, and got an arm around Irv's back. Little by little Irv came up. 'I 
don't blame your missus. You should have passed us by this morning.'    'If I had it to do over again, I'd do it just the same way,' Irv said. 'Gosh-damn people 
coming on my land with guns. Gosh-damn bastards and fucking bunch of government
whoremasters and . . . oooww-oooh, Christ!'
    'Irv?' Norma cried.
    'Hush, woman. I got it nocked now. Come on, Frank, or Andy, or whatever your name 
is. It's gettin hot.'
    It was. A puff' of wind blew a coil of sparks onto the porch as Andy half dragged Irv 
down the steps and into the dooryard. The chopping block was a blackened stump. There 
was nothing left of the chickens Charlie had set on fire but a few charred bones and a 
peculiar, dense ash that might have been feathers. They had not been roasted; they had 
been cremated.
    'Set me down by the barn,' Irv gasped. 'I want to talk to you.'
    'You need a doctor,' Andy said.
    'Yeah, I'll get my doctor. What about your girl?'
    'Fainted.' He set Irv down with his back against the barn door. Irv was looking up at 
him. A little color had come into his face, and that bluish cast was leaving his lips. He
was sweating. Behind them, the big white farmhouse that had stood here on the Baillings 
Road since 1868 was going up in flames.
    'There's no human being should be able to do what she can,' Irv said.
    'That may well be,' Andy said, and then he looked from Irv and directly into Norma 
Manders's stony, unforgiving face. 'But then, no human being should have to have
cerebral palsy or muscular dystrophy or leukemia. But it happens. And it happens to
children.'
    'She didn't get no say.' Irv nodded. 'All right.'
    Still looking at Norma, Andy said, 'She's no more a monster than a kid in an iron lung 
or in a home for retarded children.'
    'I'm sorry I said that,' Norma replied, and her glance wavered and fell from Andy's. 'I 
was out feeding the chickens with her. Watching her pet the cow. But mister, my house is 
burning down, and people are dead.'
    'I'm sorry.'
    'The house is insured, Norma,' Irv said, taking her hand with his good one.
    'That doesn't do anything about my mother's dishes that her mother gave to her,' Norma 
said. 'Or my nice secretary, or the pictures we got at the Schenectady art show last July.' 
A tear slipped out of one eye and she wiped it away with her sleeve. 'And all the letters 
you wrote to me when you were in the army.'
    'Is your button going to be all right?' Irv asked.
    'I don't know.'
    'Well, listen. Here's what you can do if you want to. There's an old Willys Jeep out
behind the barn — '
    'Irv, no! Don't get into this any deeper!'
    He turned to look at her, his face gray and lined and sweaty. Behind them, their home
burned. The sound of popping shingles was like that of horse chestnuts in a Christmas
fire.
    'Those men came with no warrants nor blueback paper of any kind and tried to take 
them off our land,' he said. 'People I'd invited in like it's done     in a civilized country 
with decent laws. One of them shot me, and one of them tried to shoot Andy here. Missed his head by no more than a quarter of an inch.' Andy remembered the first deafening
report and the splinter of wood that had jumped from the porch support post. He shivered. 
'They came and did those things. What do you want me to do, Norma? Sit here and turn 
them over to the secret police if they get their peckers up enough to come back! Be a 
good German?'
    'No,' she said huskily. 'No, I guess not.'
   'You don't have to — ' Andy began.
    'I feel I do,' Irv said. 'And when they come back . . . they will be back, won't they, 
Andy?'
    'Oh yes. They'll be back. You just bought stock in a growth industry, Irv.'
    Irv laughed, a whistling, breathless sound. 'That's pretty good, all right. Well, when
they show up here, all I know is that you took my Willys. I don't know more than that. 
And to wish you well.'
    'Thank you,' Andy said quietly.
    'We got to be quick,' Irv said. 'It's a long way back to town, but they'll have seen the 
smoke by now. Fire trucks'll be coming. You said you and the button were going to
Vermont. Was that much the truth?'
    'Yes,' Andy said.
    There was a moaning sound to their left. 'Daddy — '
    Charlie was sitting up. The red pants and green blouse were smeared with dirt. Her
face was pale, her eyes were terribly confused. 'Daddy, what's burning? I smell
something burning. Am I doing it? What's burning?'
    Andy went to her and gathered her up. 'Everything is all right,' he said, and wondered 
why you had to say that to children even when they knew perfectly well, as you did, that 
it wasn't true. 'Everything's fine. How do you feel, hon?'
    Charlie was looking over his shoulder at the burning line of cars, the convulsed body in 
the garden, and the Manders house, which was crowned with fire. The porch was also
wrapped in flames. The wind was carrying the smoke and heat away from them, but the 
smell of gas and hot shingles was strong.
    'I did that,' Charlie said, almost too low to hear. Her face began to twist and crumple 
again.
    'Button!' Irv said sternly.
    She glanced over at him, through him. 'Me,' she moaned.
    'Set her down,' Irv said. 'I want to talk to her.'
    Andy carried Charlie over to where Irv sat propped up against the barn door and set her 
down. ' 'You listen to me, button,' Irv said. 'Those men meant to kill your daddy. You
knew it before I did, maybe before he did, although I'll be damned if I know how. Am I 
right?'
    'Yes,' Charlie said. Her eyes were still deep and miserable. 'But you don't get it. It was 
like the soldier, but worse. I couldn't . . . couldn't hold onto it anymore. It was going
everyplace. I burned up some of your chickens . . . and I almost burned up my father.' 
The miserable eyes spilled over and she began to cry helplessly.
    'Your daddy's fine,' Irv said. Andy said nothing. He remembered that sudden strangling 
sensation, being enclosed in that heat capsule.
    'I'm never going to do it again,' she said.
    'Never.'    'All right,' Andy said, and put a hand on her shoulder. 'All right, Charlie.'
    'Never,' she repeated with quiet emphasis.
    'You don't want to say that, button,' Irv said, looking up at her. 'You don't want to
block yourself off' like that. You'll do what you have to do. You'll do the best you can. 
And that's all you can do. I believe the one thing the God of this world likes best, is to 
give the business to people who say `never'. You understand me?'
    'No,' Charlie whispered.
    'But you will, I  think,' Irv said, and looked at Charlie with such deep compassion that 
Andy felt his throat fill with sorrow and fear. Then Irv glanced at his wife. 'Bring me that 
there stick by your foot, Norma.'
    Norma brought the stick and put it into his hand and  told him again that he was
overdoing it, that he had to rest. And so it was only Andy that heard Charlie say 'Never' 
again, almost inaudibly, under her breath, like a vow taken in secrecy.17
'Look here, Andy,' Irv said, and drew a straight line in the dust. 'This is the dirt road we 
came up. The Baillings Road. If you go a quarter of a mile north, you'll come to a woods 
road on your right. A car can't make it up that road, but the Willys should do it if you
keep her wound up and use an educated foot on the clutch. A couple of times it's gonna 
look like that road just up and died, but you keep going and you'll pick it up again. It's not 
on any map, you understand? Not on any map.'
    Andy nodded, watching the stick draw the woods road.
    'It'll take you twelve miles east, and if you don't get stuck or lost, you'll come out on
Route One fifty  — two near Hoag Corners. You turn left  — north  — and about a mile up 
One-fifty-two you'll come to another woods road. It's low ground, swampy, mushy. The 
Willys might do it, might not. I ain't been on that road in five years, I guess. It's the only 
one I know that goes east toward Vermont and won't be road  — blocked off: That second 
road is gonna bring you out on Highway Twenty-two, north of Cherry Plain and south of 
the Vermont border. By then you should be out of the worst of it  — although I s'pose 
they'll have your name and pictures on the wire. But we wish you the best. Don't we,
Norma?'
    'Yes,' Norma said, and the word was almost a sigh. She looked at Charlie.  'You saved 
your dad's life, little girl. That's the thing to remember.' 
    'Is it?' Charlie said, and her voice was so perfectly toneless that Norma Manders looked 
bewildered and a little afraid. Then Charlie tried a hesitant smile and Norma smiled back,
relieved.
    'Keys are in the Willys, and — ' He cocked his head to one side. 'Hark!'
    It was the sound of sirens, rising and falling in cycles, still faint but drawing closer.
    'It's the FD,' Irv said. 'You better go, if you're goin.'
    'Come on, Charlie,' Andy said. She came to him, her eyes red from her tears. The small 
smile had disappeared like hesitant sunlight behind the clouds, but Andy felt greatly
encouraged that it had been there at all. The face she wore was a survivor's face, shocked 
and wounded. In that moment, Andy wished he had her power; he would use it, and he 
knew whom he would use it on.    He said, 'Thank you, Irv.'
    'I'm sorry,' Charlie said in a small voice. 'About your house and your chickens and . . . 
and everything else.'
    'It sure wasn't your fault, button,' Irv said. 'They brought it on themselves. You watch 
out for your daddy.'
    'All right,' she said.
    Andy took her hand and led her around the barn to where the Willys was parked under 
a shakepole leanto.
    The fire sirens were very close by the time he had got it started and driven it across the 
lawn to the road. The house was an inferno now. Charlie would not look at it. The last 
Andy saw of the Manderses was in the rearview mirror of the canvas  — topped jeep: Irv 
leaning against the barn, the piece of white skirting knotted around his wounded arm
stained red, Norma sitting beside him. His good arm was around her. Andy waved, and 
Irv gestured a bit in return with his bad arm. Norma didn't wave, thinking, perhaps, of her 
mother's china, her secretary, the love letters  — all the things of which insurance money
is ignorant and always has been.
18
They found the first woods road just where Irv Manders had said they would. Andy put 
the Jeep in four-wheel drive and turned onto it.
    'Hold on, Charlie,' he said. 'We're gonna bounce.'
    Charlie held on. Her face was white and listless, and looking at her made Andy
nervous.  The cottage, he thought.  Granther McGee's cottage on Tashmore Pond. If we 
can only get there and rest. She'll get herself back together and then we'll think about 
what we should do.
    We'll think about it tomorrow. Like Scarlett said it's another day.    The Willys roared and pitched its way up the road, which was no more than a twowheel  track with bushes and even a few stunted pines growing along the crown. This land 
had been logged over maybe ten years ago, and Andy doubted if it had been used since 
then, except by an occasional hunter. Six miles up it did seem to 'up and die,' and Andy
had to stop twice to move trees that had blown down. The second time he looked up from 
his exertions, heart and head pounding almost sickeningly, and saw a large doe looking at 
him thoughtfully. She held a moment longer and then was gone into the deeper woods 
with a flip of her white tail. Andy looked back at Charlie and saw she was watching the 
deer's progress with something like wonder . . . and he felt encouraged again. A little
farther on they found the wheel-ruts again, and around three o'clock they came out on the 
stretch of two-lane blacktop that was Route 152.
19
Orville Jamieson, scratched and muddy and barely able to walk on his bad ankle, sat by
the side of the Baillings Road about a half a mile from the Manders farm and spoke into 
his walkie-talkie. His message was relayed back to a temporary command post in a vanparked in the main street of Hastings Glen. The van had radio equipment with a built-in 
scrambler and a powerful transmitter. OJ's report was scrambled, boosted, and sent to
New York City, where a relay station caught it and sent it on to Longmont, Virginia,
where Cap sat in his office, listening.
    Cap's face was no longer bright and jaunty, as it had been when he biked to work that 
morning. OJ's report was nearly unbelievable: they had known the girl had  something, but 
this story of sudden carnage and reversal was (at least to Cap) like a bolt of lightning
from a clear blue sky. Four to six men dead, the others driven helter-skelter into the
woods, half a dozen cars in flames, a house burning to the ground, a civilian wounded 
and about to blab to anyone and everyone who cared to listen that a bunch of neo-Nazis 
had turned up on his doorstep with no warrant and had attempted to kidnap a man and a 
little girl whom he had invited home to lunch.
    When OJ finished his report (and he never really did; he only began to repeat himself 
in a kind of semihysteria), Cap hung up and sat in his deep swivel chair and tried to think. 
He did not think a covert operation had gone so spectacularly wrong since the Bay of
Pigs — and this was on American soil.
    The office was gloomy and filled with thick shadows now that the sun had got around 
to the other side of the building, but he didn't turn on the lights. Rachel had buzzed him
on the intercom and he had told her curtly he didn't want to talk to anyone, anyone at all.
    He felt old.
    He heard Wanless saying:  I am talking about the Potential for destruction. Well, it 
wasn't just a question of potential any longer, was it?  But we're going to have her, he 
thought, looking blankly across the room. Oh yes, we're going to have her.
    He thumbed for Rachel.
    'I want to talk to Orville Jamieson as soon as he can be flown here,' he said. 'And I 
want to talk to General Brackman in Washington,  A-one-A priority. We've got a
potentially embarrassing situation in New York State, and I want you to tell him that right 
out.'
    'Yes, sir,' Rachel said respectfully.
    'I want a meeting with all six subdirectors at nineteen hundred hours. Also  A-one-A. 
And I want to talk to the chief of state police up there in New York.' They had been part 
of the search sweep, and Cap wanted to point that out to them. If mud was going to be 
thrown, he would be sure to save back a good, big bucket of it for them. But he also 
wanted to point out that behind a united front, they might still all be able to come out of
this looking fairly decent.
    He hesitated and then said, 'And when John Rainbird calls in, tell him I want to talk to 
him. I have another job for him.'
    'Yes, sir.'
    Cap let go of the intercom toggle. He sat back in his chair and studied the shadows.
    'Nothing has happened that can't be fixed,' he said to the shadows. That had been his 
motto all his life  — not printed in crewel and hung up, not embossed on a copper desk 
plaque, but it was printed on his heart as truth.
    Nothing that can't be fixed. Until tonight, until OJ's report, he had believed that. It was 
a philosophy that had brought a poor Pennsylvania miner's kid a long way. And he
believed  it still, although in a momentarily shaken manner. Between Manders and his
wife, they probably had relatives scattered from New England to California, and each one was a potential lever. There were enough top-secret files right here in Longmont to
ensure that any congressional hearing on Shop methods would be . . . well, a little hard of 
hearing. The cars and even the agents were only hardware, although it would be a long
time before he would really be able to get used to the idea that Al Steinowitz was gone. 
Who could there possibly be to replace Al? That little kid and her old man were going to 
pay for what they had done to Al, if for nothing else. He would see to it.
    But the girl. Could the girl be fixed?
    There were ways. There were methods of containment.
    The McGee files were still on the library cart. He got up, went to them, and began
thumbing through them restlessly. He wondered where John Rainbird was at this
moment.Washington, D.C.
1
At the moment Cap Hollister had his passing thought about him, John Rainbird was
sitting in his room at the Mayflower Hotel watching a television game called The 
Crosswits. He was naked. He sat in the chair with his bare feet neatly together and
watched the program. He was waiting for it to get dark. After  it got dark, he would begin 
waiting for it to get late. When it was late, he would begin waiting for it to get early.
When it got early and the pulse of the hotel was at its slowest, he would stop waiting and 
go upstairs to Room 1217 and kill Dr. Wanless. Then he would come down here and 
think about whatever Wanless would have told him before he died, and sometime after
the sun came up, he would sleep briefly.
    John Rainbird was a man at peace. He was at peace with almost everything  — Cap, the 
Shop, the  United States. He was at peace with God, Satan, and the universe. If he was not 
yet at complete peace with himself, that was only because his pilgrimage was not yet
over. He had many coups, many honorable scars. It did not matter that people turned
away from him in fear and loathing. It did not matter that he had lost one eye in Vietnam.
    What they paid him did not matter. He took it and most of it went to buy shoes. He had 
a great love of  shoes. He owned a home in Flagstaff, and although he rarely went there 
himself, he had all his shoes sent there. When he did get a chance to go to his house, he 
admired the shoes  — Gucci, Bally, Bass, Adidas, Van Donen. Shoes. His house was a 
strange forest; shoe trees grew in every room and he would, go from room to  room 
admiring the shoefruit that grew on them. But when he was alone, he went barefoot. His 
father, a full-blooded Cherokee, had been buried barefoot. Someone had stolen his burial
moccasins.
    Other than shoes, John Rainbird was interested in only two things. One of them was 
death. His own death, of course; he had been preparing for this inevitability for twenty
years or more. Dealing death had always been his business and was the only trade he had 
ever excelled at. He became more and more interested in it as he grew older, as an artist 
will become more interested in the qualities and levels of light, as writers will feel for
character and nuance like blindmen reading braille. What interested him most was the
actual  leaving . . . the actual exhalation of the soul . . . the exit from the body and what 
human beings knew as life and the passing into something else. What must it be like to 
feel yourself slipping away? Did you think it was a dream from which you would wake? 
Was the Christian devil there with his fork, ready to jam it through your shrieking soul
and carry it down to hell like a piece of meat on a shish kebab? Was there joy? Did you 
know you were going? What is it that the eyes of the dying see?
    Rainbird hoped he would have the opportunity to  find out for himself. In his business, 
death was often quick and unexpected, something that happened in the flick of an eye. He 
hoped that when his own death came, he would have time to prepare and feel everything. 
More and more lately he had watched the faces of the people he killed, trying to see the 
secret in the eyes.
    Death interested him.
    What also interested him was the little girl they were all so concerned with. ThisCharlene McGee. As far as Cap knew, John Rainbird had only the vaguest knowledge of 
the McGees and none at all of Lot Six. Actually, Rainbird knew almost as much as Cap 
himself  — something that surely would have marked him for extreme sanction if Cap had 
known. They suspected that the girl had some great or potentially great power — maybe 
a whole batch of them. He would like to meet this girl and see what her powers were. He 
also knew that Andy McGee was what Cap called 'a potential mental dominant,' but that 
did not concern John Rainbird. He had not yet met a man who could dominate him.
    The Crosswits ended. The news came on. None of it was good. John Rainbird sat, not 
eating, not drinking, not smoking, clean and empty and husked out, and waited for the
killing time to come around.
2
Earlier that day Cap had thought uneasily of how silent Rainbird was. Dr. Wanless never 
heard him. He awoke from a sound sleep. He awoke because a finger was tickling him
just below the nose. He awoke and saw what appeared to be a monster from a nightmare 
hulking over his bed. One eye glinted softly in the light from the bathroom, the light he 
always left on when he was in a strange place. Where the other eye should have been
there was only an empty crater.
    Wanless opened his mouth to scream, and John Rainbird pinched his nostrils shut with 
the fingers of one hand and covered his mouth with the other. Wanless began to thrash.
    'Shhh,' Rainbird said. He spoke with the pleased indulgence of a mother to her baby at 
fresh diaper time.
    Wanless struggled harder.
    'If you want to live, be still and be quiet,' Rainbird said.
    Wanless looked up at him, heaved once, and then lay still.
    'Will you be quiet?' Rainbird asked.
    Wanless nodded. His face was growing very red.
    Rainbird removed his hands and Wanless began to gasp hoarsely.  A small rivulet of
blood trickled from one nostril.
    'Who . . . are you . . . Cap . . . send you?'
    'Rainbird,' he said gravely. 'Cap sent me, yes.'
    Wanless's eyes were huge in the dark. His tongue snaked out and licked his lips. Lying 
in his bed with the sheets kicked down around his knuckly ankles, he looked like the
world's oldest child.
    'I have money,' he whispered very fast. 'Swiss bank account. Lots of money. All yours. 
Never open my mouth again. Swear before God.'
    'It's not your money that I want, Dr. Wanless,' Rainbird said.
    Wanless gazed up at him, the left side of his mouth sneering madly, his left eyelid
drooping and quivering.
    'If you would like to be alive when the sun comes up,' Rainbird said, 'you will talk to 
me, Dr.  Wanless. You will lecture me. I will be a seminar of one. I will be attentive; a 
good pupil. And I will reward you with your life, which you will live far away from the 
view of Cap and the Shop. Do you understand?'
    'Yes,' Wanless said hoarsely.    'Do you agree?'
    'Yes . . . but what — ?'
    Rainbird held two fingers to his lips and Dr. Wanless hushed immediately. His
scrawny chest rose and fell rapidly.
    'I am going to say two words,' Rainbird said, 'and then your lecture will begin. It will 
include everything that you know, everything you suspect, everything you theorize. Are
you ready for those two words, Dr. Wanless?'
    'Yes,' Dr. Wanless said.
    'Charlene McGee,' Rainbird said, and Dr. Wanless began to speak. His words came
slowly at first, and then he began to speed up. He talked. He gave Rainbird the complete 
history of the Lot Six tests and the climactic experiment. Much of what he said Rainbird 
already knew, but Wanless also filled in a number of blank spots. The professor went
through the entire sermon he had given Cap that morning, and here it did not fall on deaf 
ears. Rainbird listened carefully, frowning sometimes, clapping softly and chuckling at
Wanless's toilet training metaphor. This encouraged Wanless to speak even faster, and 
when he began to repeat himself, as old men will, Rainbird reached down again, pinched 
Wanless's nose shut with one hand again, and covered his mouth with the other again.
    'Sorry,' Rainbird said.
    Wanless bucked and sunfished under Rainbird's weight. Rainbird applied more
pressure, and when Wanless's struggles began to lessen, Rainbird abruptly removed the
hand he had been using to pinch Wanless's nose shut. The sound of the good doctor's
hissing breath was like air escaping from a tire with a big nail in it. His eyes were rolling 
wildly in their sockets, rolling like the eyes of a fear maddened horse . . . but they were 
still too hard to see.
    Rainbird seized the collar of Dr. Wanless's pajama jacket and yanked him sideways on 
the, bed so that the cold white light from the bathroom shone directly across his face.
    Then he pinched the doctor's nostrils closed again.
    A man can sometimes survive for upward of nine minutes without permanent brain
damage if his air is cut off and he remains completely quiet; a woman, with slightly
greater lung capacity and a slightly more efficient carbon-dioxide-disposal system, may
last ten or twelve. Of course, struggling and terror cuts that survival time a great deal.
    Dr. Wanless struggled briskly for  forty seconds, and then his efforts to save himself
began to flag. His hands beat lightly at the twisted granite that was John Rainbird's face. 
His heels drummed a muffled retreat tattoo on the carpeting. He began to drool against
Rainbird's callused palm.
    This was the moment.
    Rainbird leaned forward and studied Wanless's eyes with a childlike eagerness.
    But it was the same, always the same. The eyes seemed to lose their fear and fill
instead with a great puzzlement. Not wonder, not dawning comprehension or realization
or awe, just puzzlement. For a moment those two puzzled eyes fixed on John Rainbird's 
one, and Rainbird knew he was being seen. Fuzzily, perhaps, fading back and back as the 
doctor went out and out, but he was being seen. Then there was nothing but glaze. Dr. 
Joseph Wanless was no longer staying at the Mayflower Hotel; Rainbird was sitting on
this bed with a life size doll.
    He sat still, one hand still over the doll's mouth, the other pinching the doll's nostrils
tightly together. It was best to be sure. He would remain so for another ten minutes.    He thought about what Wanless had told him concerning Charlene McGee. Was it
possible that a small child could have such a power? He supposed it might be. In Calcutta 
he had seen a man put knives into his body  — his legs, his belly, his chest, his neck  —
and then pull them out, leaving no wounds. It might be possible. And it was certainly . . . 
interesting.
    He thought about these things, and then found himself wondering what it would be like 
to kill a child. He had never knowingly done such a thing (although once he had placed a 
bomb on an airliner and the bomb had exploded, killing all sixty-seven aboard, and
perhaps one or more of them had been children, but that was not the same thing; it was 
impersonal). It was not a business in which the death of children was often required.
They were not, after all, some terrorist organization like the IRA or the PLO, no matter 
how much some people —  some of the yellowbellies in the Congress, for instance  —
would like to believe they were.
    They were, after all, a scientific organization.
    Perhaps with a child the result would be different. There might be another expression
in the eyes at the end, something besides the puzzlement that made him feel so empty and 
so — yes, it was true — so sad.
    He might discover part of what he needed to know in the death of a child.
    A child like this Charlene McGee.
    'My life is like the straight roads in the desert,' John Rainbird said softly. He looked 
absorbedly into the dull blue marbles that had been the eyes of Dr. Wanless. 'But your 
life is no road at all, my friend . . . my good friend.'
    He kissed Wanless first on one cheek and then on the other. Then he pulled him back 
onto the bed  and threw a sheet over him. It came down softly, like a parachute, and
outlined Wanless's jutting and now tideless nose in white lawn.
    Rainbird left the room.
    That night he thought about the girl who could supposedly light fires. He thought about 
her a great deal. He wondered where she was, what she was thinking, what she was
dreaming. He felt very tender about her, very protective.
    By the time he drifted off to sleep, at just past six A.M., he was sure: the girl would be 
his.Tashmore, Vermont
1
Andy and Charlie McGee arrived at the cottage on Tashmore Pond two days after the
burning at the Manders farm. The Willys hadn't been in great shape to start with, and the 
muddy plunge over the woods roads that Irv had directed them onto had done little to 
improve it.
    When dusk came on the endless day that had begun in Hastings Glen, they had been 
less then twenty yards from the end of the second  — and worse  — of the two woods 
roads. Below them, but screened off by a heavy growth of bushes, was Route 22.
Although they couldn't see the road, they could hear the occasional swish and whine of
passing cars and trucks. They slept that night in the Willys, bundled up for warmth. They
set out again the next morning — yesterday morning — at just past five A.M., with
daylight nothing but a faint white tone in the east.
    Charlie looked pallid and listless and used up. She hadn't asked him what would
happen to them if the roadblocks had been shifted east. It was just as well, because if the 
roadblocks had been shifted, they would be caught, and that was simply all there was to 
it. There was no question of ditching the Willys, either; Charlie was in no shape to walk, 
and for that matter, neither was he.
    So Andy had pulled out onto the highway and all that day in October they had jigged 
and jogged along secondary roads under a white sky that promised rain but never quite 
delivered it. Charlie slept a great deal, and Andy worried about her  — worried that she 
was using the sleep in an unhealthy way, using it to flee what had happened instead of
trying to come to terms with it.
    He stopped twice at roadside diners and picked up burgers and fries. The second time 
he used the five  — dollar bill that the van driver, Jim Paulson, had laid on him. Most of 
the remaining phone change was gone. He must have lost some of it out of his pockets 
during that crazy time at the Manders place, but he didn't recall it. Something else was
gone as well; those frightening numb places on his face had faded away sometime during
the night. Those he didn't mind losing.
    Most of Charlie's share of the burgers and fries went uneaten.
    Last night they had driven into a highway rest area about an hour after dark. The rest 
area was deserted. It was autumn, and the season of the Winnebagos had passed for 
another year. A rustic woodburned sign read: NO CAMPING NO FIRES LEASH YOUR 
DOG $500 FINE FOR LITTERING.
    'They're real sports around here,' Andy muttered, and drove the Willys down the slope 
beyond the far edge of the gravel parking lot and into a copse beside a small, chuckling 
stream. He and Charlie got out and went wordlessly down to the water. The overcast
held, but it was mild; there were no stars visible and the night seemed extraordinarily
dark. They sat down for a while and listened to the brook tell its tale. He took Charlie's 
hand and that was when she began to cry  — great, tearing sobs that seemed to be trying 
to rip her apart.
    He took her in his arms and rocked her. 'Charlie,' he murmured. 'Charlie, Charlie, don't. 
Don't cry.'    'Please don't make me do it again, Daddy,' she wept. 'Because if you said to I'd do it 
and then I guess I'd kill myself, so please . . . please . . . never . . .'
    'I love you,' he said. 'Be quiet and stop talking about killing yourself. That's crazy-talk.'
    'No,' she said. 'It isn't. Promise, Daddy.'
    He thought for a long time and then said slowly: 'I don't know if I can, Charlie. But I 
promise to try. Will that be good enough?'
    Her troubled silence was answer enough.
    'I get scared, too,' he said softly. 'Daddies get scared, too. You better believe it.'
    They spent that night, too, in the cab of the Willys. They were back on the road by six 
o'clock in the morning. The clouds had broken up, and by ten o'clock it had become a
flawless, Indian-summery day. Not long after they crossed the Vermont state line they
saw men riding ladders like masts in tossing apple trees and trucks in the orchards filled 
with bushel baskets of Macs.
    At eleven-thirty they turned off Route 34 and onto a narrow, rutted dirt road marked 
PRIVATE PROPERTY, and something in Andy's chest loosened. They had made it to
Granther McGee's place. They were here.
    They drove slowly down toward the pond, a distance of perhaps a mile and a half.
October leaves, red and gold, swirled across the road in front of the Jeep's blunt nose. Just 
as glints of water began to show through the trees, the road branched in two. A heavy
steel chain hung across the smaller branch, and from the chain a rust-flecked yellow sign: 
NO TRESPASSING BY ORDER OF COUNTY SHERIFF. Most of the rust flecks had formed around six or eight dimples in the metal, and Andy guessed that some summer kid 
had spent a few minutes working off his boredom by plinking at the sign with his .22. But 
that had been years ago.
    He got out of the Willys and took his keyring out of his pocket. There was a leather tab 
on the ring with his initials. A.McG., almost obliterated. Vicky had given him that piece
of leather for Christmas one year — a Christmas before Charlie had been born.
    He stood by the chain for a moment, looking at the leather tab, then at the keys
themselves. There were almost two dozen of them. Keys were funny things; you could
index a life by the keys that had a way of collecting on your keyring. He supposed that 
some people, undoubtedly people who had realized a higher degree of organization than
he had, simply threw their old keys away, just as those same organizational types made a 
habit of cleaning their wallets out every six months or so. Andy had never done either.
    Here was the key that opened the east-wing door of Prince Hall back in Harrison,
where his office had been. His key to the office itself. To the English Department office. 
Here was the key to the house in Harrison that he had seen for the last time on the day the 
Shop killed his wife and kidnapped his daughter. Two or three more he couldn't even
identify. Keys were funny things, all right.
    His vision blurred. Suddenly he missed Vicky, and needed her as he hadn't needed her 
since those first black weeks on the road with Charlie. He was so tired, so scared, and so 
full of anger. In that moment, if he'd had every employee of the Shop lined up in front of 
him along Granther's road, and it someone had handed him a Thompson submachine gun 
. . .
    'Daddy?' It was Charlie's voice, anxious. 'Can't you find the key?'    'Yes, I've got it,' he said. It was among the rest, a small Yale key on which he had 
scratched T.P. for Tashmore Pond with his jackknife. The last time they had been here was the year Charlie was born, and now Andy had to wiggle the key a little before the 
stiff tumblers would turn. Then the lock popped open and he laid the chain down on the 
carpet of fall leaves.
    He drove the Willys through and then re-padlocked the chain.
    The road was in bad shape, Andy was glad to see. When they came up regularly every 
summer, they would stay three or four weeks and he would always find a couple of days 
to work on the road  — get a load of gravel from Sam Moore's gravel  pit and put it down 
in the worst of the ruts, cut back the brush, and get Sam himself to come down with his 
old dragger and even it out. The camp road's other, broader fork led down to almost two 
dozen camp homes and cottages strung along the shorefront,  and those folks had their
Road Association, annual dues. August business meeting and all (although the business
meeting was really only an excuse to get really loaded before Labor Day came and put an 
end to another summer), but Granther's place was the only one down this way, because 
Granther himself had bought all the land for a song back in the depths of the Depression.
    In the old days they'd had a family car, a Ford wagon. He doubted if the old wagon 
would have made it down here now, and even the Willys, with its high axles, bottomed 
out once or twice. Andy didn't mind at all. It meant that no one had been down here.
    'Will there be electricity, Daddy?' Charlie asked.
    'No,' he said, 'and no phone, either. We don't dare get the electricity turned on, kiddo. 
It'd be like holding up a sign saying HERE WE ARE. But there are kerosene lamps and 
two range-oil drums. If the stuff hasn't been ripped off, that is.' That worried him a little. 
Since the last time they'd been down here, the price of range oil had gone up enough to 
make the theft worthwhile, he supposed.
    'Will there be — ' Charlie began.
    'Holy shit,' Andy said. He jammed on the brakes. A tree had fallen across the road up 
ahead, a big old birch pushed down by some winter storm. 'I guess we walk from here. 
It's only a mile or so anyway. We'll hike it.' Later he would have to come back with
Granther's one-handed buck and cut the tree up. He didn't want to leave Irv's Willys
parked here. It was too open.
    He ruffled her hair. 'Come on.'
    They got out of the Willys, and Charlie scooted effortlessly under the birch while
Andy clambered carefully over, trying not to skewer himself anywhere important. The
leaves crunched agreeably under their feet as they walked on, and the woods were
aromatic with fall. A squirrel looked down at them from a tree, watching their progress
closely. And now they began to see bright slashes of blue again through the trees.
    'What did you start to say back there when we came to the tree?' Andy asked her.
    'If there would be enough oil for a long time. In case we stay the winter.'
    'No, but there's enough to start with. And I'm going to cut a lot of wood. You'll haul 
plenty of it, too.'
    Ten minutes later the road widened into a clearing on the shore of Tashmore Pond and 
they were there. They both stood quietly for a moment. Andy didn't know what Charlie 
was feeling, but for him there was a rush of remembrance too total to be called anything
so mild as nostalgia. Mixed up in the memories was his dream of three mornings ago  —
the boat, the squirming nightcrawler, even the tire patches on Granther's boots.
    The cottage was five rooms, wood over fieldstone base. A deck jutted out toward the 
lake, and a stone pier poked out into the water itself. Except for the drifts of leaves and the blowdowns of three winters, the place hadn't changed a bit. He almost expected
Granther himself to come strolling out, wearing one of those green and black checked
shirts, waving and bellowing for him to come on up, asking  him if he'd got his fishing
license yet, because the brown trout were still biting good around dusk.    It had been a good place, a safe place. Far across Tashmore Pond, the pines glimmered 
gray-green in the sunshine.  Stupid trees, Granther had said once,  don't even know the 
difference between summer and winter. The only sign of civilization on the far side was 
still the Bradford Town Landing. No one had put up a shopping centre or an amusement 
park. The wind still talked in the trees here. The green shingles still had a mossy, woodsy 
look, and pine needles still drifted in the roof angles and in the cup of the wooden gutter. 
He had been a boy here, and Granther had shown him how to bait a hook. He had had his 
own bedroom here, paneled in good maple, and he had dreamed a boy's dreams in a 
narrow bed and had awakened to the sound of water lapping the pier. He had been a man 
here as well, making love to his wife in the double bed that had once belonged to
Granther and his wife  — that silent and somehow baleful woman who was a member of 
the American Society of Atheists and would explain to you, should you ask, the Thirty
Greatest Inconsistencies in the King James Bible, or, should you prefer, the Laughable
Fallacy of the Clockspring Theory of the Universe, all with the thudding, irrevocable
logic of a dedicated preacher.
    'You miss Mom, don't you?' Charlie said in a forlorn voice.
    'Yeah,' he said. 'Yeah, I do.'
    'Me too,' Charlie said. 'You had fun here, didn't you?'
    'We did,' he agreed. 'Come on, Charlie.'
    She held back, looking at him.
    'Daddy, will things ever be all right for us again? Will I be able to go to school and 
things?'
    He considered a lie, but a lie was a poor answer. 'I don't know,' he said. He tried to 
smile, but it wouldn't come; he found he could not even stretch his lips convincingly. 'I
don't know, Charlie.'
2
Granther's tools were all still neatly racked in the toolshed portion of the boathouse, and 
Andy found a bonus he had hoped for but had told himself not to hope for too much:
nearly two cords of wood, neatly split and time-seasoned in the bay beneath the
boathouse. Most of it he had split himself, and it was still under the sheet of ragged, dirty 
canvas he had thrown over it. Two cords wouldn't take them through the winter, but by 
the time he finished carving up the blowdowns around the camp and the birch back on the 
road, they would be well set.
    He took the bucksaw back up to the fallen tree and cut it up enough to get the Willys 
through. By then it was nearly dark, and he was tired and hungry. No one had bothered to 
rip off the well stocked pantry, either; if there had been vandals or thieves or
snowmobiles over the last six winters, they had stuck to the more populous southern end 
of the lake. There were five shelves packed with Campbell's soups and Wyman's sardines 
and Dinty Moore beef stew and all sorts of canned vegetables. There was also still half a case of Rival dog food on the floor  — a legacy of Granther's good old dog Bimbo  — but 
Andy didn't think it would come to that.
    While Charlie looked at the books on the shelves in the big living room, Andy went
into the small root cellar that was three steps down from the pantry, scratched a wooden
match on one of the beams, stuck his finger into the knothole in one of the boards that 
lined the sides of the little dirt floored room, and pulled. The board came out and Andy
looked inside. After a moment he grinned. Inside the cobweb-festooned little bolt-hole 
were four mason jars filled with a clear, slightly  oily looking liquid that was onehundred-percent pure white lightning — what Granther called 'father's mule-kick.'
    The match burned Andy's fingers. He shook it out and lit a second. Like the dour New 
England preachers of old (from whom she had been a direct descendant), Hulda McGee 
had no liking, understanding, or tolerance for the simple and slightly stupid male
pleasures. She had been a Puritan atheist, and this had been Granther's little secret, which 
he had shared with Andy the year before he died.
   Besides the white lightning, there was a caddy for poker chips. Andy pulled it out and 
felt in the slot at the top. There was a crackling sound, and he pulled out a thin sheaf of
bills  — a few tens and fives and some ones. Maybe eighty dollars all told. Granther's 
weakness had been seven-card stud, and this was what he called his 'struttin money.'
    The second match burned his fingers, and Andy shook it out. Working in the dark, he 
put the poker chips back, money and all. It was good to know it was there. He replaced 
the board and went back through the pantry.
    'Tomato soup do you?' he asked Charlie. Wonder of wonders, she had found all the 
Pooh books on one of the shelves and was currently some where in the Hundred Acre 
Wood with Pooh and Eeyore.
    'Sure,' she said, not looking up.
    He made a big pot of tomato soup and opened them each a tin of sardines. He lit one of 
the kerosene lamps after carefully drawing the drapes and put it in the middle of the
dining table. They sat down and ate, neither of them talking much. Afterward he smoked 
a cigarette, lighting it over the chimney of the lamp. Charlie discovered the card drawer 
in Grandma's Welsh dresser; there were eight or nine decks in there, each of them
missing a jack or a deuce or something,  and she spent the rest of the evening sorting them 
and playing with them while Andy prowled through the camp.
    Later, tucking her into bed, he asked her how she felt.
    'Safe,' she said with no hesitation at all. 'Goodnight, Daddy.'
    If it was good enough for Charlie, it was good enough for him. He sat with her awhile, 
but she dropped off to sleep quickly and with no trouble, and he left after propping her 
door open so he would hear her if she became restless in the night.
3
Before turning in, Andy went back down to the root cellar, got one of the jars of white 
lightning, poured himself a small knock in a juice glass, and went out through the sliding
door and onto the deck. He sat in one of the canvas director's chairs (mildewy smell; he 
wondered  briefly if something could be done about that) and looked out at the dark,
moving bulk of the lake. It was a trifle chilly, but a couple of small sips at Granther'smule-kick took care of the chill quite nicely. For the first time since that terrible chase up 
Third Avenue, he too felt safe and at rest.
    He smoked and looked out across Tashmore Pond.
    Safe and at rest, but not for the first time since New York City. For the first time since 
the Shop had come back into their lives on that terrible August day fourteen months ago. 
Since then they had either been running or hunkering down, and either way there was no 
rest.
    He remembered talking to Quincey on the telephone with the smell of burned carpeting 
in his nostrils. He in Ohio, Quincey out there in California, which in his few letters he
always called the Magic Earthquake Kingdom.  Yes, it's a good thing, Quincey had said. 
Or they might put them in two little rooms where they could work full-time to keep two 
hundred and twenty million Americans safe and free . . . . I bet they'd just want to take 
that child and put it in a little room and see if it could help make the world safe for 
democracy. And I think that's all I want to say, old buddy, except . . . keep your head 
down.
    He thought he had been scared then. He hadn't known what scared was. Scared was 
coming home and finding your wife dead with her fingernails pulled out. They had pulled 
out her nails to find out where Charlie was. Charlie had been spending two days and two 
nights at her friend Terri Dugan's house. A month or so later they had been planning to 
have Terri over to their house for a similar length of time. Vicky had called it the Great 
Swap of 1980.
    Now, sitting on the deck and smoking, Andy could reconstruct what had happened,
although then he had existed in nothing but a blur of grief and panic and rage: it had been 
the blindest good luck (or perhaps a little more than luck) that had enabled him to catch
up with them at all.
    They had been under surveillance, the whole family. Must have been for some time.
And when Charlie hadn't come home from summer daycamp that Wednesday afternoon, 
and didn't show up on Thursday or Thursday evening either, they must have decided that 
Andy and Vicky had tumbled to the surveillance. Instead of discovering that Charlie was 
doing no more than staying at a friend's house not two miles away, they must have
decided that they had taken their daughter and gone underground.
    It was a crazy, stupid mistake, but it hadn't been the first such on the Shop's part  —
according to an article Andy had read in  Rolling Stone, the Shop had been involved and 
heavily influential in precipitating a bloodbath over an airplane hijacking by Red Army
terrorists (the hijack had been  aborted  — at the cost of sixty lives), in selling heroin to 
the Organization in return for information on mostly harmless Cuban-American groups in
Miami, and in the communist takeover of a Caribbean island that had once been known
for its multimillion-dollar beachfront hotels and its voodoo-practicing population.
    With such a series of colossal gaffes under the Shop's belt, it became less difficult to 
understand how the agents employed to keep watch on the McGee family could mistake a 
child's two nights at a friend's house as a run for  the tall timber. As Quincey would have 
said (and maybe he had), if the most efficient of the Shop's thousand or more employees 
had to go to work in the private sector, they would have been drawing unemployment
benefits before their probationary periods were up.
    But there had been crazy mistakes on both sides, Andy reflected — and if the
bitterness in that thought had become slightly vague and diffuse with the passage of time, it had once been sharp enough to draw blood, a many-tined bitterness, with each sharp 
point tipped with the curare of guilt. He had been scared by the things Quincey implied 
on the phone that day Charlie tripped and fell down the stairs, but apparently he hadn't 
been scared enough. If he had been, perhaps they would have gone underground.
    He had discovered too late that the human mind can become hypnotized when a life, or 
the life of a family, begins to drift out of the normal range of things and into a fervid
fantasy-land that you are usually asked to accept only in sixty-minute bursts on TV or 
maybe for one-hundred-ten-minute sittings in the local Cinema I.
    In the wake of his conversation with Quincey, a peculiar feeling had gradually crept
over him: it began to seem that he was constantly stoned. A tap on his phone? People 
watching them? A possibility that they might all be scooped up and dropped into the
basement rooms of some government complex? There was such a tendency to smile a
silly smile and just watch these things loom up, such a tendency to do the civilized thing
and pooh-pooh your own instincts ....
    Out on Tashmore Pond there was a sudden dark flurry and a number of ducks took off 
into the night, headed west. A half-moon was rising, casting a dull silver glow across
their wings as they went. Andy lit another cigarette. He was smoking too much, but he 
would get a chance to go cold turkey soon enough; he had only four or five left.
    Yes, he had suspected there was a tap on the phone. Sometimes there would be an odd 
double click after you picked it up and said  hello. Once or twice, when he had been
talking to a student who had called to ask about an assignment or to one of his colleagues, 
the connection had been mysteriously broken. He had suspected that there might be bugs 
in the house, but he had never torn the place apart looking for them (had he suspected he 
might find them?). And several times he had suspected  — no, had been almost sure  —
that they were being watched.
    They had lived in the Lakeland district of Harrison, and Lakeland was the sublime
archetype of suburbia. On a drunk night you could circle six or eight blocks for hours,
just looking for your own house. The people who were their neighbors worked for the
IBM plant outside town, Ohio Semi Conductor in town, or taught at the college. You
could  have drawn two ruler-straight lines across an average family-income sheet, the
lower line at eighteen and a half thousand and the upper one at, maybe thirty thousand, 
and almost everyone in Lakeland would have fallen in the area between.    You got to know people. You nodded on the street to Mrs. Bacon, who had lost her 
husband and had since been remarried to vodka — and she looked it; the honeymoon
with that particular gentleman was playing hell with her face and figure. You tipped a V
at the two girls with the white Jag who were renting the house on the corner of Jasmine 
Street and Lakeland Avenue  — and wondered what spending the night with the two of
them would be like. You talked baseball with Mr. Hammond on Laurel Lane as he
everlastingly trimmed his hedges. Mr. Hammond was with IBM ('Which stands for I've
Been Moved,' he would tell you endlessly as the electric clippers hummed and buzzed),
originally from Atlanta and a rabid Atlanta Braves fan. He loathed Cincinnati's Big Red
Machine, which did not exactly endear him to the neighbourhood. Not that Hammond
gave a shit. He was just waiting for IBM to hand him a fresh set of walking papers.
    But Mr. Hammond was not the point. Mrs. Bacon wasn't the point, nor were those two 
luscious peaches in their white jag with the dull red primer paint around the headlights.
The point was that after a while your brain formed its own subconscious subset: people who belong in Lakeland.
    But in the months before Vicky was killed and Charlie snatched from the Dugans'
house, there had been people around who didn't belong to that subset. Andy had
dismissed them, telling himself it would be foolish to alarm Vicky just because talking to 
Quincey had made him paranoid.
    The people in the light-gray van. The man with the red hair that he had seen slouched 
behind the wheel of an AMC Matador one night and then behind the wheel of a Plymouth 
Arrow one night about two weeks later and then in the shotgun seat of the gray van about 
ten days after that. Too many salesmen came to call. There had been evenings when they 
had come home from a day out or from taking Charlie to see the latest Disney epic when 
he had got the feeling that someone had been in the house, that things had been moved 
around the tiniest bit.
    That feeling of being watched.
    But he hadn't believed it would go any further than watching. That had been  his crazy 
mistake. He was still not entirely convinced that it had been a case of panic on their part. 
They might have been planning to snatch Charlie and himself, killing Vicky because she 
was relatively useless  — who really needed a low-grade psychic whose big trick for the 
week was closing the refrigerator door from across the room?
    Nevertheless, the job had a reckless, hurry-up quality to it that made him  think that 
Charlie's surprise disappearance had made them move more quickly than they had
intended. They might have waited if it had been Andy who dropped out of sight, but it 
hadn't been. It had been Charlie, and she was the one they were really interested in. Andy 
was sure of that now.
    He got up and stretched, listening to the bones in his spine crackle. Time he went to 
bed, time he stopped hashing over these old, hurtful memories. He was not going to
spend the rest of his life blaming himself for Vicky's death. He had only been an
accessory before the fact, after all. And the rest of his life might not be that long, either. 
The action on Irv Manders's porch hadn't been lost on Andy McGee. They had meant to 
waste him. It was only Charlie they wanted now.
    He went to bed, and after a while he slept. His dreams were not easy ones. Over and 
over he saw that trench of fire running across the beaten dirt of the dooryard, saw it
divide to make a fairy-ring around the chopping block, saw the chickens going  up like 
living incendiaries. In the dream, he felt the heat capsule around him, building and
building.
    She said she wasn't going to make fires anymore. 
    And maybe that was best.
    Outside, the old October moon shone down on Tashmore Pond on Bradford, New
Hampshire, across the water, and on the rest of New England. To the south, it shone
down on Longmont, Virginia.
4
Sometimes Andy McGee had feelings — hunches of extraordinary vividness. Ever since 
the experiment in Jason Gearneigh Hall. He didn't know if the hunches were a low-grade 
sort of precognition or not, but he had learned to trust them when he got them.    Around noon on that August day in 1980, he got a bad one.    It began during lunch in the Buckeye Room, the faculty lounge on the top floor of the 
Union building. He could even pinpoint the exact moment. He had been having creamed 
chicken on rice with Ev O'Brian, Bill Wallace, and Don Grabowski, all in the English
Department. Good friends, all of them. And as usual, someone had brought along a Polish 
joke for Don, who collected them. It had been Ev's joke, something about being able to 
tell a Polish ladder from a regular one because the Polish ladder had the word STOP
lettered on the top rung. All of them were laughing when a small, very calm voice spoke 
up in Andy's mind.
    (something's wrong at home)
    That was all. That was enough. It began to build up almost the same way that his
headaches built up when he overused the push and tipped himself over. Only this wasn't a 
head thing;  all his emotions seemed to be tangling themselves up, almost lazily, as if they
were yarn and some bad-tempered cat had been let loose along the runs of his nervous 
system to play with them and snarl them up.
    He stopped feeling good. The creamed chicken lost whatever marginal appeal it had
had to begin with. His stomach began to flutter, and his heart was beating rapidly, as if he 
had just had a bad scare. And then the fingers of his right hand began abruptly to throb, as 
if he had got them jammed in a door.
    Abruptly he stood up. Cold sweat was breaking on his forehead.
    'Look, I don't feel so good,' he said. 'Can you take my one o'clock, Bill?'
    'Those aspiring poets? Sure. No problem. What's wrong?'
    'I don't know. Something I ate, maybe.'
    'You look sort of pale,' Don Grabowski said. 'You ought to cruise over to the infirmary, 
Andy.'
    'I may do that,' Andy said.
    He left, but with no intention whatever of going to the infirmary. It was quarter past
twelve, the late summer campus  drowsing through the last week of the final summer
session. He raised a hand to Ev,
    Bill, and Don as he hurried out. He had not seen any of them since that day.
    He stopped on the Union's lower level, let himself into a telephone booth, and called 
home. There was no answer. No real reason why there should have been; with Charlie at 
the Dugans, Vicky could have been out shopping, having her hair done, she could have 
been over at Tammy Upmore's house or even having lunch with Eileen Bacon.
Nevertheless, his nerves cranked up another notch. They were nearly screaming now.
    He left the Union building and half walked, half ran to the station wagon, which was in 
the Prince Hall parking lot. He drove across town to Lakeland. His driving was jerky and 
poor. He jumped lights, tailgated, and came close to knocking a hippie of his ten-speed 
Olympia. The hippie gave him the finger. Andy barely noticed. His heart was trip
hammering now. He felt as if he had taken a hit of speed.
    They lived on Conifer Place — in Lakeland, as in so many suburban developments
built in the fifties, most of the streets seemed named for trees or shrubs. In the midday
August heat, the street seemed queerly deserted. It only added to his feeling that
something bad had happened. The street looked wider with so few cars parked along the 
curbs. Even the few kids playing here and there could not dispel that strange feeling of
desertion; most of them were eating lunch or over at the playground. Mrs. Flynn fromLaurel Lane walked past with a bag of groceries in a wheeled caddy, her paunch as round 
and tight as a soccer ball under her avocado-colored stretch pants. All up and down the 
street, lawn sprinklers twirled lazily, fanning water onto the grass and rainbows into the
air.
    Andy drove the offside wheels of the wagon up over the curb and then slammed on the 
brakes hard enough to lock his seatbelt momentarily and to make the wagon's nose dip 
toward the pavement. He turned off the engine with the gearshift still in Drive, something
he never did, and went up the cracked cement walk that he kept meaning to patch and 
somehow never seemed to get around to. His heels clacked meaninglessly. He noticed
that the venetian blind over the big living-room picture window  (mural window, the
realtor who  had sold them the house called it, here ya gotcha basic mural window) was 
drawn, giving the house a closed, secretive aspect he didn't like. Did she usually pull the 
blind? To keep as much of the summer heat out as possible, maybe? He didn't know. He 
realised there were a great many things he didn't know about her life when he was away.
    He reached for the doorknob, but it didn't turn; it only slipped through his fingers. Did 
she lock the door when he was gone? He didn't believe it. That wasn't Vicky. His worry 
— no, it was terror now increased. And yet there was one moment (which he would never 
admit to himself later), one small moment when he felt nothing but an urge to turn away
from that locked door. Just hightail it. Never mind Vicky, or Charlie, or the weak
justifications that would come later.
    Just run.
    Instead, he groped in his pocket for his keys.
    In his nervousness he dropped them and had to bend to pick them up  — car keys, the 
key to the east wing of Prince Hall, the blackish key that unlocked the chain he put across 
Granther's road at the end of each summer visit. Keys had a funny way of accumulating.
    He plucked his housekey from the bunch and unlocked the door. He went in and shut it 
behind him. The light in the living room was  a low, sick yellow. It was hot. And still. Oh 
God it was so still.
    'Vicky?'
    No answer. And all that no answer meant was that she wasn't here. She had put on her 
boogie shoes, as she liked to say, and had gone marketing or visiting. Except that she
wasn't doing either of those things. He felt sure of it. And his hand, his right hand . . . 
why were the fingers throbbing so?
    'Vicky!'
    He went into the kitchen. There was a small Formica table out there with three chairs. 
He and Vicky and Charlie usually ate their breakfast in the kitchen. One of the chairs
now lay on its side like a dead dog. The salt shaker had overturned and salt was spilled 
across the table's surface. Without thinking about what he was doing, Andy pinched some 
of it between the thumb and first finger of his left hand and tossed it back over his
shoulder, muttering under his breath, as both his father and his Granther had done before 
him, 'Salt salt malt malt bad luck stay away.'
    There was a pot of soup on the Hotpoint. It was cold. The empty soup can stood on the 
counter. Lunch for one. But where was she?
    'Vicky!' he hollered down the stairs. Dark down there. The laundry room and the
family room, which ran the length of the house.
    No answer.    He looked around the kitchen again. Neat and tidy. Two of Charlie's drawings, made at 
the Vacation Bible School she had attended in July, held on the refrigerator with small
plastic vegetables that had magnetic bases. An electric bill and a phone bill stuck on the 
spike with the motto PAY THESE LAST written across the base. Everything in its place 
and a place for everything.
    Except the chair was overturned. Except the salt was spilled.
    There was no spit in his mouth, none at all. His mouth was as dry and slick as chrome 
on a summer day.
    Andy went upstairs, looked through Charlie's room, their room, the guest room.
Nothing. He went back through the kitchen, flicked on the stairway light, and went
downstairs. Their Maytag washer gaped open. The dryer fixed him with one glassy 
porthole eye. Between them, on the wall, hung a sampler Vicky had bought somewhere; 
it read HONEY, WE'RE ALL WASHED UP. He went into the family room and fumbled 
for the light switch, fingers brushing at the wall, crazily sure that at any moment
unknown cold fingers would close over his and guide them to the switch. Then he found 
the plate at last, and the fluorescent bars set into the Armstrong ceiling glowed alive.
    This was a good room. He had spent a lot of time down here, fixing things up, smiling 
at himself all the time because, in the end, he had become all those things that as
undergraduates they had sworn they would not become. All three of them had spent a lot 
of time down here. There was a TV built into the wall, a Ping  — Pong table, an oversized 
backgammon board. More board games were cased against one wall, there were some
coffee-table-sized books ranged along a low table that Vicky had made from barnboard. 
One wall had been dressed in paperbacks. Hung on the walls were several framed and 
matted afghan squares that Vicky had knitted; she joked that she was great at individual
squares but simply didn't have the stamina to knit a whole damn blanket. There were
Charlie's books in a special kid-sized bookcase, all of them carefully arranged  in 
alphabetical order, which Andy had taught her one boring snowy night two winters
before and which still fascinated her.
    A good room.
    An empty room.
    He tried to feel relief. The premonition, hunch, whatever you wanted to call it, had
been wrong. 
    She just wasn't here. He snapped off the light and went back into the laundry room.
    The washing machine, a front-loader they had picked up at a yard sale for sixty bucks, 
still gaped open. He shut it without thinking, much as he had tossed a pinch of the spilled 
salt over his shoulder. There was blood on the washer's glass window. Not much. Only
three or four drops. But it was blood.
    Andy stood staring at it. It was cooler down here, too cool, it was like a morgue down 
here. He looked at the floor. There was more blood on the floor. It wasn't even dry. A
little sound, a soft, squealing whisper, came from his throat.
    He began to walk around the laundry room, which was nothing but a small alcove with 
white plaster walls. He opened the clothes hamper. It was empty but for one sock. He 
looked in the cubbyhole under the sink. Nothing but Lestoil and Tide and Biz and Spic 'n 
Span. He looked under the stairs. Nothing there but cobwebs and the plastic leg of one of 
Charlie's older dolls  — that dismembered limb lying patiently down here and waiting for 
rediscovery for God knew how long.    He opened the door between the washer and the dryer and the ironing board whistled 
down with a ratchet and a crash and there beneath it, her legs tied up so that her knees 
were just below her chin, her eyes open and glazed and dead, was Vicky Tomlinson
McGee with a cleaning rag stuffed in her mouth. There was a thick and sickening smell
of Pledge furniture polish in the air.
    He made a low gagging noise and stumbled backward. His hand flailed, as if to drive 
this terrible vision away, and one of them struck the control panel of the dryer and it
whirred into life. Clothes began to tumble and click inside. Andy screamed. And then he 
ran. He ran up the stairs and  stumbled going around the corner into the kitchen and
sprawled flat and bumped his forehead on the linoleum. He sat up, breathing hard.
    It came back. It came back in slow motion, like a football instant replay where you see 
the quarterback sacked or the winning pass caught. It haunted his dreams in the days that 
came later. The door swinging open, the ironing board falling down to the horizontal with
a ratcheting sound, reminding him somehow of a guillotine, his wife crammed into the
space beneath and in her mouth a rag that had been used to polish the furniture. It came 
back in a kind of total recall and he knew he was going to scream again and so he
slammed his forearm into his mouth and he bit it and the sound that came out was a
fuzzy, blocked howl.  He did that twice, and something came out of him and he was calm. 
It was the false calm of shock, but it could be used. The amorphous fear and the
unfocused terror fell away. The throbbing in his right hand was gone. And the thought
that stole into his mind now was as cold as the calmness that had settled over him, as cold 
as the shock, and that thought was CHARLIE.
    He got up, started for the telephone, and then turned back to the stairs. He stood at the 
top for a moment, biting at his lips, steeling himself, and then he went back down. The 
dryer turned and turned. There was nothing in there but a pair of his jeans, and it was the 
big brass button at the waist that made that clicking, clinking sound as they turned and
fell, turned and fell. Andy shut the dryer off and looked into the ironing-board closet.
    'Vicky,' he said softly.
    She stared at him with her dead eyes, his wife. He had walked with her, held her hand, 
entered her body in the dark of night. He found himself remembering the night she had 
drunk too much at a faculty party and he had held her head while she threw up. And that 
memory became the day he had been washing the station wagon and he had gone into the 
garage for a moment to get the can of Turtle Wax and she had picked up the hose and had 
run up behind him and stuffed the hose down the back of his pants. He remembered
getting married and kissing her in front of everyone, relishing that kiss, her mouth, her
ripe, soft mouth.
    'Vicky,' he said again, and uttered a long, trembling sigh.
    He pulled her out and worked the rag from her mouth. Her head lolled limp on her
shoulders. He saw that the blood had come from her right hand, where some of her
fingernails had been pulled. There was a small trickle of blood from one of her nostrils, 
but none anywhere else. Her neck had been broken by a single hard blow.    'Vicky,' he whispered.
    Charlie, his mind answered back.
    In the still calm that now filled his head, he understood that Charlie had become the
important thing, the only important thing. Recriminations were for the future.
    He went back into the family room, not bothering to turn on the light this time. Across the room, by the Ping-Pong table, was a couch with a drop cloth over it. He took the drop 
cloth and went back  into the laundry room and covered Vicky with it. Somehow, the
immobile shape of her under the sofa's drop cloth was worse. It held him nearly
hypnotized. Would she never move again? Could that be?
    He uncovered her face and kissed her lips. They were cold.
    They pulled her nails, his mind marveled. Jesus Christ, they pulled her nails.
    And he knew why. They wanted to know where Charlie was. Somehow they had lost 
track of her when she went to Terri Dugan's house instead of coming home after daycamp. They had panicked, and now the watching phase was over. Vicky was dead —
either on purpose or because some Shop operative had got overzealous. He knelt beside 
Vicky and thought it was possible that, prodded by her fear, she had done something
rather more spectacular than shutting the fridge door from across the room. She might
have shoved one of them away or knocked the feet out from beneath one of them. Too 
bad she hadn't had enough to throw them into the wall at about fifty miles an hour, he 
thought.
    It could have been that they knew just enough to make them nervous, he supposed.
Maybe they had even been given specific orders: The woman may be extremely
dangerous. If she does something  — anything  — to jeopardize the operation, get rid of 
her. Quick.
   Or maybe they just didn't like leaving witnesses. Something more than their share of
the taxpayer's dollar was at stake, after all.
    But the blood. He should be thinking about the blood, which hadn't even been dry
when he discovered it, only tacky. They hadn't been gone long when he arrived.
    More insistently his mind said: Charlie!
    He kissed his wife again and said, 'Vicky, I'll be back.'
    But he had never seen Vicky again, either.
    He had gone upstairs to the telephone and looked up the Dugans' number in Vicky's 
Phone-Mate. He dialed the number the Joan Dugan answered.
    'Hi, Joan,' he said, and now the shock was aiding him: his voice was perfectly calm, an 
everyday voice. 'Could I speak to Charlie for a second?'
    'Charlie?' Mrs. Dugan sounded doubtful. 'Well, she went with those two friends of
yours. Those teachers. Is . . . wasn't that all right?'
    Something inside of him went skyrocketing up and then came plunging down. His
heart, maybe. But it would do no good to panic this nice woman whom he had only met 
socially four or five times. It wouldn't help him, and it wouldn't help Charlie.
    'Damn,' he said. 'I was hoping to catch her still there. When did they go?'
    Mrs. Dugan's voice faded a little. 'Terri, when did Charlie go?'
    A child's voice piped something. He couldn't tell what. There was sweat between his
knuckles.
    'She says about fifteen minutes ago.' She was apologetic. 'I  was doing the laundry and I 
don't have a watch. One of them came down and spoke to me. It was all right, wasn't it, 
Mr. McGee? He looked all right . . .'
    A lunatic impulse came to him, to just laugh lightly and say  Doing the laundry, were 
you? So was my wife. I found her crammed in under the ironing board. You got off lucky 
today, Joan.
    He said, 'That's fine. Were they coming right here, I wonder?'    The question was relayed to Terri, who said she didn't know. Wonderful, Andy
thought. My daughter's life is in the hands of another six-year-old girl.
    He grasped at a straw.
    'I have to go down to the market on the corner,' he said to Mrs. Dugan. 'Will you ask 
Terri if they had the car or the van? In case I see them.'
    This time he heard Terri. 'It was the van. They went away in a gray van, like the one 
David Pasioco's father has.'
    'Thanks,' he said. Mrs. Dugan said not to mention it. The impulse came again, this time 
just to scream  My wife is dead! down the line at her.  My wife is dead and why were you 
doing your laundry while my daughter was getting into a gray van with a couple of 
strange men?
    Instead of screaming that or anything, he hung up and went outside. The heat whacked 
him over the head and he staggered a little. Had it been this hot when he came? It seemed 
much hotter now. The mailman had come. There was a Woolco advertising circular
sticking out of the mailbox that hadn't been there before. The mailman had come while he 
was downstairs cradling his dead wife in his arms. His poor dead Vicky: they had pulled 
out her nails, and it was funny — much funnier than the way the keys had of
accumulating, really  — how the fact of death kept coming at you from different sides and 
different angles. You tried to jig and jog, you tried to protect yourself on one side, and the 
truth of it bored right in on another side. Death is a football player, he thought, one big
mother. Death is Franco Harris or Sam Cunningham or Mean Joe Green. And it keeps 
throwing you down on your ass right there at the line of scrimmage.
    Get your feet moving, he thought. Fifteen minutes' lead time  — that's not so much. It's 
not a cold trail yet. Not unless Terri Dugan doesn't know fifteen minutes from half an
hour or two hours. Never mind that, anyway. Get going.
    He got going. He went back to the station wagon, which was parked half on and half 
off' the sidewalk.
    He opened the driver's-side door and then spared a glance back at his neat suburban
house on which the mortgage was half paid. The bank let you take a 'payment vacation' 
two months a year if you needed it. Andy had never needed it. He  looked at the house 
dozing in the sun, and again his shocked eyes were caught by the red flare of the Woolco 
circular sticking out of the mailbox, and  whap! death hit him again, making his eyes blur 
and his teeth clamp down.
    He got in the car and drove away toward Terri Dugan's street, not going on any real, 
logical belief that he could pick up their trail but only on blind hope. He had not seen his 
house on Conifer Place in Lakeland since then.
    His driving was better now. Now that he knew the worst, his driving was a lot better. 
He turned on the radio and there was Bob Seger singing 'Still the Same.'    He drove across Lakeland, moving as fast as he dared. For one terrible moment he
came up blank on the name of the street, and then it came to him.  The Dugans lived on 
Blassmore Place. He and Vicky had joked about that: Blassmore Place, with houses
designed by Bill Blass. He started to smile a little at the memory, and  whap! the fact of 
her death hit him again, rocking him.
    He was there in ten minutes. Blassmore Place was a short dead end. No way out for a 
gray van at the far end, just a cyclone fence that marked the edge of the John Glenn
Junior High School.    Andy parked the wagon at the intersection of Blassmore Place and Ridge Street. There 
was a green-over-white house on the corner. A lawn sprinkler twirled. Out front were two 
kids, a girl and a boy of about ten. They were taking turns on a skateboard. The girl was 
wearing shorts, and she had a good set of scabs on each knee.
    He got out  of the wagon and walked toward them. They looked him up and down
carefully.
    'Hi,' he said. 'I'm looking for my daughter. She passed by here about half an hour ago 
in a gray van. She was with . . . well, some friends of mine. Did you see a gray van go 
by?'
    The boy shrugged vaguely.
    The girl said, 'You worried about her, mister?'
    'You saw the van, didn't you?' Andy asked pleasantly, and gave her a very slight push. 
Too much would be counterproductive. She would see the van going in any direction he 
wanted, including skyward.
    'Yeah, I saw a van,' she said. She got on the skateboard and glided toward the hydrant 
on the corner and then jumped off: 'It went right up there.' She pointed farther up
Blassmore Place. Two or three intersections up was Carlisle Avenue, one of Harrison's 
main thoroughfares. Andy had surmised that would be the way they would go, but it was 
good to be sure.
    'Thanks,' he said, and got back into the wagon.
    'You worried about her?' the girl repeated.
    'Yes, I am, a little,' Andy said.
    He turned the wagon around and drove three blocks up Blassmore Place to the junction 
with Carlisle Avenue. This was hopeless, utterly hopeless. He felt a touch of panic, just a 
small hot spot, but it would spread. He made it go away, made himself concentrate on
getting as far down their trail as possible. If he had to use the push, he would. He could 
give a lot of small helping pushes without making himself feel ill. He thanked God that
he hadn't used the talent — or the curse, if you wanted to look at it that way — all
summer long. He was up and fully charged, for whatever that was worth.    Carlisle Avenue was four lanes wide and regulated here by a stop-and-go light. There 
was a car wash on his right and an abandoned diner on his left. Across the street was an 
Exxon station and Mike's Camera Store. If they had turned left, they had headed
downtown. Right, and they would be headed out toward the airport and Interstate 80.
    Andy turned into the car wash. A young guy with an incredible shock of wiry red hair 
spilling over the collar of his dull green coverall jived over. He was eating a Popsicle.
    'No can do, man,' he said before Andy could even open his mouth. 'The rinse
attachment busted about an hour ago. We're closed.'
    'I don't want a wash,' Andy said. 'I'm looking for a gray van that went through the
intersection maybe half an hour ago. My daughter was in it, and I'm a little worried about 
her.'
    'You think somebody might have snatched her?' He went right on eating his Popsicle.
    'No, nothing like that,' Andy said. 'Did you see the van?'
    'Gray van? Hey, goodbuddy, you have any idea how many cars go by here in just one 
hour? Or half an hour? Busy street, man. Carlisle is a very busy street.'
    Andy cocked his  thumb over his shoulder. 'It came from Blassmore Place. That's not so 
busy.' He got ready to add a little push, but he didn't have to. The young guy's eyessuddenly brightened. He broke his Popsicle in two like a wishbone and sucked all the
purple ice off one of the sticks in a single improbable slurp.
    'Yeah, okay, right,' he said. 'I did see it. I'll tell you why I noticed. It cut across our 
tarmac to beat the light. I don't care myself, but it irritates the  shit out of the boss when 
they do that. Not  that it matters today with the rinser on the fritz. He's got something else 
to be irritated about.'
    'So the van headed toward the airport.'
    The guy nodded, flipped one of the Popsicle sticks back over his shoulder, and started 
on the remaining chunk. 'Hope you find your girl, goodbuddy. If you don't mind a little, 
like, gray-tuitous advice, you ought to call the cops if you're really worried.'
    'I don't think that would do much good,' Andy said. 'Under the circumstances.'
    He got back in the wagon again, crossed the tarmac himself, and turned onto Carlisle 
Avenue. He was now headed west. The area was cluttered with gas stations, car washes, 
fast-food franchises, used-car lots. A drive-in advertised a double bill consisting Of THE
CORPSE GRINDERS and BLOODY MERCHANTS OF DEATH. He looked at the
marquee and heard the ironing board ratcheting out of its closet like a guillotine. His
stomach rolled over.
    He passed under a sign announcing that you could get on I-80 a mile and a half farther 
west,  if that was your pleasure. Beyond that was a smaller sign with an airplane on it.
Okay, he had got this far. Now what?
    Suddenly he pulled into the parking lot of a Shakey's Pizza. It was no good stopping 
and asking along here. As the car-wash guy had said, Carlisle was a busy street. He could 
push people until his brains were leaking out his ears and only succeed in confusing
himself. It was the turnpike or the airport, anyway. He was sure of it. The lady or the
tiger.
    He had never in his life  tried to make one of the hunches come. He simply took them 
as gifts when they did come, and usually acted on them. Now he slouched farther down in 
the driver's seat of the wagon, touching his temples lightly with the tips of his fingers,
and tried to make something come. The motor was idling, the radio was still on. The
Rolling Stones. Dance, little sister, dance.
    Charlie, he thought. She had gone off to Terri's with her clothes stuffed in the knapsack 
she wore just about everywhere. That had probably helped to fool them. The last time he 
had seen her, she was wearing jeans and a salmon-colored shell top. Her hair was in
pigtails, as it almost always was. A nonchalant good-bye, Daddy, and a kiss and holy
Jesus, Charlie, where are you now?
    Nothing came.
    Never mind. Sit a little longer. Listen to the Stones. Shakey's Pizza. You get your
choice, thin crust or crunchy. You pays your money and you takes your choice, as
Granther McGee used to say. The Stones exhorting little sister to dance, dance, dance.
Quincey saying they'd probably put her in a room so two hundred and twenty million
Americans could be safe and free. Vicky. He and Vicky had had a hard time with the sex 
part of it at first. She had been scared to death. Just call me the Ice Maiden, she had  said 
through her tears after that first miserable botched time. No sex, please we're British. But 
somehow the Lot Six experiment had helped with that — the totality they had shared
was, in its own way, like mating. Still it had been difficult. A little at  a time. Gentleness. 
Tears. Vicky beginning to respond, then stiffening, crying out Don't, it'll hurt, don't,Andy, stop it! And somehow it was the Lot Six experiment, that common experience, that 
had enabled him to go on trying, like a safecracker who knows that there is a way, always 
a way. And there had come a night when they got through it. Later there came a night 
when it was all right. Then, suddenly, a night when it was glorious. Dance, little sister,
dance. He had been with her when Charlie was born. A quick, easy delivery. Quick to fix, 
easy to please ....
    Nothing was coming. The trail was getting colder and he had nothing. The airport or
the turnpike? The lady or the tiger?
    The Stones finished. The Doobie Brothers came on, wanting to know without love,
where would you be right now. Andy didn't know. The sun beat down. The lines in the 
Shakey's parking lot had been freshly painted. They were very white and firm against the 
black-top. The lot was more than three quarters full. It was lunchtime. Had Charlie got 
her lunch? Would they feed her? Maybe
    (maybe they'll stop make a service stop you know at one of those Hojos along the pike 
— after all they can't drive can't drive can't drive)
    Where? Can't drive where?
    (can't drive all the way to Virginia without making a rest stop can they? I mean a little 
girl has got to stop and take a tinkle sometime, doesn't she?)
    He straightened up, feeling an immense but numb feeling of gratitude. It had come,
just like that. Not the airport, which would have been his first guess, if he had only been 
guessing. Not the airport but the turnpike. He wasn't completely sure the hunch was bona 
fide, but he was pretty sure. And it was better than not having any idea at all.
    He rolled the station wagon  over the freshly painted arrow pointing the way out and 
turned right on Carlisle again. Ten minutes later he was on the turnpike, headed east with
a toll ticket tucked into the battered, annotated copy of  Paradise Lost on the seat beside 
him. Ten minutes after that, Harrison, Ohio, was behind him. He had started on the trip 
east that would bring him to Tashmore, Vermont, fourteen months later.    The calm held. He played the radio loud and that helped. Song followed song and he 
only recognized the older ones because he had pretty much stopped listening to pop
music three or four years ago. No particular reason; it had just happened. They still had 
the jump on him, but the calm insisted with its own cold logic that it was a very good 
jump  — and that he would be asking for trouble if he just started roaring along the
passing lane at seventy.
    He pegged the speedometer at just over sixty, reasoning that the men who had taken 
Charlie would not want to exceed the fifty-five speed limit. They could flash their
credentials at any Smokey who pulled them down for speeding, that was true, but they
might have a certain amount of difficulty explaining a screaming six-year-old child just
the same. It might slow them down, and it would surely get them in dutch with whoever 
was pulling the strings on this show.
    They could have drugged her and hidden her, his mind whispered. Then if they got 
stopped for busting along at seventy, even eighty, they'd only have to show their paper 
and keep right on going. Is an Ohio state  cop going to toss a van that belongs to the 
Shop?
    Andy struggled with that as eastern Ohio flowed by. First, they might be scared to drug 
Charlie. Sedating a child can be a tricky business unless you're an expert . . . and they
might not be sure what  sedation would do to the powers they were supposed to beinvestigating. Second, a state cop might just go ahead and toss the van anyway, or at least 
hold them in the breakdown lane while he checked the validity of their ID. Third, why
should they be busting their asses? They had no idea anyone was onto them. It was still
not one o'clock. Andy was supposed to be at the college until two o'clock. The Shop
people would not expect him to arrive back home until two-twenty or so at the earliest 
and probably felt  they could count on anywhere from twenty minutes to two hours after 
that before the alarm was raised. Why shouldn't they just be loafing along?
    Andy went a little faster.
    Forty minutes passed, then fifty. It seemed longer. He was beginning to sweat  a little; 
worry was nibbling through the artificial ice of calm and shock. Was the van really
someplace up ahead, or had the whole thing been so much wishful thinking?
    The traffic patterns formed and re-formed. He saw two gray vans. Neither of them
looked like the one he had seen cruising around Lakeland. One was driven by an elderly
man with flying white hair. The other was full of freaks smoking dope. The driver saw
Andy's close scrutiny and waved a roach clip at him. The girl beside him popped up her
middle finger, kissed it gently, and tipped it Andy's way. Then they were behind him.
    His head was beginning to ache. The traffic was heavy, the sun was bright. Each car 
was loaded with chrome, and each piece of chrome had its own arrow of sun to flick into 
his eyes. He passed a sign that said REST AREA 1 MILE AHEAD.
     He had been in the passing lane. Now he signaled right and slipped into the travel lane 
again. He let his speed drop to forty-five, then to forty. A small sports car passed him and 
the driver blipped his horn at Andy in irritated fashion as he went by.    REST AREA, the sign announced. It wasn't a service stop, simply a turn-out with slant 
parking, a water fountain, and bathrooms. There were four or five cars parked in there
and one gray van.  The gray van. He was almost sure of it. His heart began to slam against 
the walls of his chest. He turned in with a quick twist of the station wagon's wheel, and 
the tires made a low wailing sound.
    He drove slowly down the entranceway toward the van, looking around, trying to take 
in everything at once. There were two picnic tables with a family at each one. One group 
was just clearing up and getting ready to go, the mother putting leftovers into a bright
orange carrier bag, the father and the  two kids policing up the junk and taking it over to 
the trash barrel. At the other table a young man and woman were eating sandwiches and 
potato salad. There was a sleeping baby in a carrier seat between them. The baby was 
wearing a corduroy     jumper with a lot of dancing elephants on it. On the grass, between 
two big and beautiful old elms, were two girls of about twenty, also having lunch. There 
was no sign of Charlie or of any men who looked both young enough and tough enough
to belong to the Shop.
    Andy killed the station wagon's engine. He could feel his heartbeat in his eyeballs now. 
The van looked empty. He got out.
    An old woman using a cane came out of the ladies' comfort station and walked slowly 
toward an old burgundy Biscayne. A gent of about her age got out from behind the wheel, 
walked around the hood, opened her door, and handed her in. He went back, started up 
the Biscayne, a big jet of oily blue smoke coming from the exhaust pipe, and backed out.
    The men's-room door opened and Charlie came out. Flanking her on the left and right 
were men of about thirty in sport coats, open-throated shirts, and dark double-knit pants. 
Charlie's face looked blank and shocked. She looked from one of the men to the other and then back at the first. Andy's guts began to roll helplessly. She was wearing her pack
sack. They were walking toward the van. Charlie said something to one of them and he 
shook his head. She turned to the other. He shrugged, then said something to his partner 
over Charlie's head.  The other one nodded. They turned around and walked toward the 
drinking fountain.
    Andy's heart was beating faster than ever. 
    Adrenaline spilled into his body in a sour, jittery flood. He was scared, scared plenty, 
but something else was pumping up inside him and it was anger, it was total fury. The 
fury was even better than the calm. It felt almost sweet. Those were the two men out
there that had killed his wife and stolen his daughter, and if they weren't right with Jesus, 
he pitied them.
    As they went to the drinking fountain with Charlie; their backs were to him. Andy got 
out of the wagon and stepped behind the van.
    The family of four who had just finished their lunch walked over to a new midsized
Ford, got in, and backed out. The mother glanced over at Andy with no curiosity at all, 
the way people look at each other when they are on long trips, moving slowly through the 
digestive tract of the U.S. turnpike system. They drove off, showing a Michigan plate.
There were now three cars and the  gray van and Andy's station wagon parked in the rest 
area. One of the cars belonged to the girls. Two more people were strolling across the 
grounds, and there was one man inside the little information booth, looking at the  I-80 
map, his hands tucked into the back pockets of his jeans.
    Andy had no idea of exactly what he was going to do.
    Charlie finished her drink. One of the two men bent over and took a sip. Then they
started back toward their van. Andy was looking at them from around the van's back-left 
corner. Charlie looked scared, really scared. She had been crying. Andy tried the back
door of the van, not knowing why, but it was no good anyway; it was locked.
    Abruptly he stepped out into full view.
    They were very quick. Andy saw the recognition come into their eyes immediately,
even before the gladness flooded Charlie's face, driving away that look of blank,
frightened shock.
    'Daddy!' she cried shrilly, causing the young couple with the baby to look around. One 
of the girls under the elms shaded her eyes to see what was happening.    Charlie tried to run to him and one of the men grabbed her by the shoulder and hauled 
her back against him, half-twisting her pack sack from her shoulders. An instant later
there was a gun in his hand. He had produced it from somewhere under his sport coat like 
a magician doing an evil trick. He put the barrel against Charlie's temple.
    The other man began to stroll unhurriedly away from Charlie and his partner, then
began to move in on Andy. His hand was in his coat, but his conjuring was not as good as 
his partner's had been; he was having a little trouble producing his gun.
    'Move away from the van if you don't want anything to happen to your daughter,' the 
one with the gun said.
    'Daddy!' Charlie cried again.
    Andy moved slowly away from the van. The other fellow, who was prematurely bald, 
had his gun out now. He pointed it at Andy. He was less than five feet away. 'I advise you 
very sincerely not to move,' he said in a low voice. 'This is a  Colt forty-five and it makes 
a giant hole.'    The young guy with his wife and baby at the picnic table got up. He was wearing
rimless glasses and he looked severe. 'What exactly is going on here?' he asked in the
carrying, enunciated tones of a college instructor.
    The man with Charlie turned toward him. The muzzle of his gun floated slightly away
from her so that the young man could see it. 'Government business,' he said. 'Stay right 
where you are; everything is fine.'
    The young man's wife grabbed his arm and pulled him down.
    Andy looked at the balding agent and said in a low, pleasant voice, 'That gun is much 
too hot to hold.'
    Baldy looked at him, puzzled. Then, suddenly, he screamed and dropped his revolver. 
It struck the pavement and went off: One of the girls under the elms let out a puzzled, 
surprised shout. Baldy was holding his hand and dancing around. Fresh white blisters
appeared on his palm, rising like bread dough.
    The man with Charlie stared at his partner, and for a moment  the gun was totally
distracted from her small head.
    'You're blind,' Andy told him, and pushed just as hard as he could. A sickening wrench 
of pain twisted through his head.
    The man screamed suddenly. He let go of Charlie and his hands went to his eyes.
    'Charlie,' Andy said in a low voice, and his daughter ran to him and clutched his legs in 
a trembling bear hug. The man inside the information booth ran out to see what was
going on.
    Baldy, still clutching his burned hand, ran toward Andy and  Charlie. His face worked 
horribly.
    'Go to sleep,' Andy said curtly, and pushed again. Badly dropped sprawling as if poleaxed. His forehead bonked on the pavement. The young wife of the stern young man
moaned.
    Andy's head hurt badly now, and he was  remotely glad that it was summer and that he 
hadn't used the push, even to prod a student who was letting his grades slip for no good 
reason, since perhaps May. He was charged up  — but charged up or not, God knew he 
was going to pay for what he was doing this hot summer afternoon.
    The blind man was staggering around on the grass, holding his hands up to his face and 
screaming. He walked into a green barrel with PUT LITTER IN ITS PLACE stenciled on 
its side and fell down in an overturned jumble of sandwich bags, beer cans, cigarette
butts, and empty soda bottles.
    'Oh Daddy, jeez I was so scared,' Charlie said, and began to cry.
    'The wagon's right over there. See it?' Andy heard himself say. 'Get in and I'll be with 
you in a minute.'
    'Is Mommy here?'
    'No. Just get in, Charlie.' He couldn't deal with that now. Now, somehow, he had to 
deal with these witnesses.
    'What the hell is this?' the man from the information booth asked, bewildered.
    'My eyes,' the man who had had his gun up to Charlie's head screamed.  'My eyes, my 
eyes. What did you do to my eyes, you son of a bitch?' He got up. There was a sandwich 
bag sticking to one of his hands. He began to totter off toward the information booth, and 
the man in the bluejeans darted back inside.
    'Go, Charlie.'    'Will you come, Daddy?'
    'Yes, in just a second. Now go.'
    Charlie went, blond pigtails bouncing. Her pack sack was still hanging askew.
    Andy walked past the sleeping Shop agent, thought about his gun, and decided he
didn't want it. He walked over to the young people at the picnic table. Keep it small, he 
told himself. Easy. Little taps. Don't go starting any echoes. The object is not to hurt
these people.
    The young woman grabbed her baby from its carrier seat rudely, waking it. It began to. 
cry. 'Don't you come near me, you crazy person!' she said.
    Andy looked at the man and his wife.
    'None of this is very important,' he said, and pushed. Fresh pain settled over the back of 
his head like a spider . . . and sank in.
    The young man looked relieved. 'Well, thank God.'
    His wife offered a tentative smile. The push hadn't taken so well with her; her
maternity had been aroused.
    'Lovely baby you have there,' Andy said. 'Little boy, isn't it?'
    The blind  man stepped off the curbing, pitched forward, and struck his head on the
doorpost of the red Pinto that probably belonged to the two girls. He howled. Blood
flowed from his temple. 'I'm blind.' he screamed again.
    The young woman's tentative smile became radiant. 'Yes, a boy,' she said. 'His name is 
Michael.'
    'Hi, Mike,' Andy said. He ruffled the baby's mostly bald head.
    'I can't think why he's crying,' the young woman said. 'He was sleeping so well until
just now. He must be hungry.'
    'Sure, that's it,' her husband said.
    'Excuse me.' Andy walked toward the information booth. There was no time to lose
now. Someone else could turn into this roadside bedlam at any time.
    'What is it, man?' the fellow in the bluejeans asked. 'Is it a bust?'
    'Nah, nothing happened,' Andy said, and gave another light push. It was starting make 
him feel sick now. His head thudded and pounded.
    'Oh,' the fellow said. 'Well, I was just trying to figure out how to get to Chagrin Falls 
from here. Excuse me.' And he sauntered back inside the information booth.
    The two girls had retreated to the security fence that separated the turn-out from the 
private farmland beyond it. They stared at him with wide eyes. The blind man was now
shuffling around on the pavement in a circle with his arms held stiffly out in front of him. 
He was cursing and weeping.
    Andy advanced slowly toward the girls, holding his hands out to show them there was 
nothing in them. He spoke to them. One of them asked him a question and he spoke 
again. Shortly they both began to smile relieved smiles and to nod. Andy waved to them
and they both waved in return. Then he walked rapidly across the grass toward the station 
wagon. His forehead was beaded with cold sweat and his stomach was rolling greasily. 
He could only pray that no one would drive in before he and Charlie got away, because 
there was nothing left. He was completely tipped over. He slid in behind the wheel and 
keyed the engine.
    'Daddy,' Charlie said, and threw herself at him, buried her face against his chest. He 
hugged her briefly and then backed out of the parking lot. Turning his head was agony. The black horse. In the aftermath, that was the thought that always came to him. He had 
let the black horse out of its stall somewhere in the dark barn of his subconscious and 
now it would again batter its way up and down through his brain. He would have to get 
them someplace and lay up. Quick. He wasn't going to be capable of driving for long.
    'The black horse,' he said thickly.  It was coming. No . . . no. It wasn't coming; it was 
here. Thud... thud . . . thud. Yes, it was here. It was free.
    'Daddy, look out!' Charlie screamed.
    The blind man had staggered directly across their path. Andy braked. The blind man
began to pound on the hood of the wagon and scream for help. To their right, the young 
mother had begun to breast feed her baby. Her husband was reading a paperback. The 
man from the information booth had gone over to talk to the two girls from the red Pinto 
— perhaps hoping for some quickie experience kinky enough to write up for the
Penthouse Forum. Sprawled out on the pavement, Baldy slept on.
    The other operative pounded on the hood of the wagon again and again. 'Help me!' he 
screamed. 'I'm blind! Dirty bastard did something to my eyes! I'm blinds'
    'Daddy,' Charlie moaned.
    For a crazy instant, he almost floored the accelerator. Inside his aching head he could 
hear the sound the tires would make, could feel the dull thudding of the wheels as they
passed over the body. He had kidnapped Charlie and held a gun to her head. Perhaps he 
had been the one who had stuffed the rag into Vicky's mouth so she wouldn't scream
when they pulled out her fingernails. It would be so very good to kill him . . . except then 
what would separate him from them?
    He laid on the horn instead. It sent another bright spear of agony through his head. The 
blind man leaped away from the car as if stung. Andy hauled the wheel around and drove 
past him. The last thing he saw in the rearview mirror as he drove down the reentry lane 
was the blind man sitting on the pavement, his face twisted in anger and terror . . . and the 
young woman placidly raising baby Michael to her shoulder to burp him.    He entered the flow of turnpike traffic without looking. A horn blared; tires squalled. A 
big Lincoln swerved around the wagon and the driver shook his fist at them.
    'Daddy, are you okay?'
    'I will be,' he said. His voice seemed to come from far away. 'Charlie, look at the toll 
ticket and see what the next exit is.'
    The traffic blurred in front of his eyes. It doubled, trebled, came back together, then
drifted into prismatic fragments again. Sun reflecting off bright chrome everywhere.
    'And fasten your seatbelt, Charlie.'
    The next exit was Hammersmith, twenty miles farther up. Somehow he made it. He
thought later that it was only the consciousness of Charlie sitting next to him, depending
on him, that kept him on the road. Just as Charlie had got him through all the things that 
came after  — the knowledge of Charlie, needing him. Charlie McGee, whose parents had 
once needed two hundred dollars.
    There was a Best Western at the foot of the Hammersmith ramp, and Andy managed to 
get them checked in, specifying a room away from the turnpike. He used a bogus name.
    'They'll be after us, Charlie,' he said. 'I need to sleep. But only until dark, that's all the 
time we can take . . . all we dare to take. Wake me up when it's dark.'    She said something else, but then he was falling on the bed. The world was blurring
down to a gray point, and then even the point was gone and everything was darkness,where the pain couldn't reach. There was no pain and there were no dreams. When
Charlie shook him awake again on that hot August evening at quarter past seven, the
room was stifling hot and his clothes were soaked with sweat. She had tried to make the 
air conditioner work but hadn't been able to figure out the controls.
    'It's okay,' he said. He swung his feet onto the floor and put his hands on his temples, 
squeezing his head so it wouldn't blow up.
    'Is it any better, Daddy?' she asked anxiously.
    'A little,' he said. And it was . . . but only a little. 'We'll stop in a little while and get 
some chow. That'll help some more.'
    'Where are we going?'
    He shook his head slowly back and forth. He had only the money he had left the house 
with that morning  — about seventeen dollars. He had his Master Charge and his Visa, but 
he had paid for their room with the two twenties he always  kept in the back of his wallet 
(my run-out money, he sometimes told Vicky, joking, but how hellishly true that had 
turned out to be) rather than use either one of them. Using either of those cards would be 
like painting a sign: THIS WAY TO THE FUGITIVE COLLEGE INSTRUCTOR AND HIS DAUGHTER. The seventeen dollars would buy them some burgers and top off the 
wagon's gas tank once. Then they would be stone broke.
    ''I don't know, Charlie,' he said. 'Just away.'
    'When are we going to get Mommy?'
    Andy looked up at her and his headache started to get worse again. He thought of the 
drops of blood on the floor and on the washing-machine porthole. Ire thought of the smell 
of Pledge.
    'Charlie — ' he said, and could say no more. There was no need, anyway.
   She looked at him with slowly widening eyes. Her hand drifted up to her trembling
mouth.
    'Oh no, Daddy . . . please say it's no.'
    'Charlie — '
    She screamed, 'Oh please say it's no!'
    'Charlie, those people who — '
    'Please say she's all right, say she's all right, say she's all right!'
    The room, the room was so hot, the air conditioning was off, that was all it was, but it 
was so  hot, his head aching, the sweat rolling down his face, not cold sweat now but hot, 
like oil, hot —
    'No,' Charlie was saying, 'No, no, no, no, no.' She shook her head. Her pigtails flew
back and forth, making him think absurdly of the first time he and Vicky had taken her to 
the amusement park, the carousel —
    It wasn't the lack of air conditioning.
    'Charlie!' He yelled. 'Charlie, the bathtub! The water!'
    She screamed. She turned her head toward the open bathroom door and there was a 
sudden blue flash in there like a lightbulb burning out. The showerhead fell off the wall
and clattered into the tub, twisted and black. Several of the blue tiles shattered to
fragments.
    He barely caught her when she fell, sobbing.
    'Daddy, I'm sorry, I'm sorry — '
    'It's all right,' he said shakily, and enfolded her. From the bathroom, thin smoke driftedout of the fused tub. All the porcelain surfaces had crack-glazed instantly. It was as if the 
entire bathroom had been run through some powerful but defective firing kiln. The towels 
were smoldering.
    'It's all right,' he said, holding her, rocking her. 'Charlie, it's all right, it's gonna be all
right, somehow it'll come right, I promise.'
    'I want Mommy,' she sobbed.
    He nodded. He wanted her, too. He held Charlie tightly to him and smelled ozone and 
porcelain and cooked Best Western towels. She had almost flash-fried them both.
    'It's gonna be all right,' he told her, and rocked her, not really believing it, but it was the 
litany, it was the Psalter, the voice of the adult calling down the black well of years into 
the miserable pit of terrorized childhood; it was what you said when things went wrong; 
it was the nightlight that could not banish the monster from the closet but perhaps only
keep it at bay for a little while; it was the voice without power that must speak
nevertheless.
    'It's  gonna be all right,' he told her, not really believing it, knowing as every adult
knows in his secret heart that nothing is really all right, ever. 'It's gonna be all right.'
    He was crying. He couldn't help it now. His tears came in a flood and he held  her to his 
chest as tightly as he could.
    'Charlie, I swear to you, somehow, it's gonna be all right.'
5
The one thing they had not been able to hang around his neck  — as much as they might 
have liked to  — was the murder of Vicky. Instead, they had elected to simply erase what 
had happened in the laundry room. Less trouble for them. Sometimes — not often —
Andy wondered what their neighbors back in Lakeland might have speculated. Bill
collectors? Marital problems? Maybe a drug habit or an incident of child abuse? They
hadn't known anyone on Conifer Place well enough for it to have been any more than idle 
dinnertable chat, a nine days' wonder soon forgotten when the bank that held the
mortgage released their house.
    Sitting on the deck now and looking out into darkness, Andy thought he might have 
had more luck that day than he had known (or been able to appreciate). He had arrived 
too late to save Vicky, but he had left before the Removal People arrived.
    There had never been a thing about it in the paper, not even a squib about how —
funny thing! an English instructor named Andrew McGee and his family had just up and 
disappeared. Perhaps the Shop had got that quashed, too. Surely he had been reported 
missing; one or all of the guys he had been eating lunch with that day would have done 
that much. But it hadn't made the papers, and of course, bill collectors don't advertise.
    'They would have hung it on me if they could,' he said, unaware that he had spoken
aloud.
    But they couldn't have. The medical examiner could have fixed the time of death, and 
Andy, who had been in plain sight of some disinterested third party (and in the case of Eh 
— 116, Style and the Short Story, from ten to eleven-thirty, twenty-five disinterested
third parties) all that day, could not have been set up to take the fall. Even if he'd been
unable to provide substantiation for his movements during the critical time, there was nomotive.
    So the two of them had killed Vicky and then gone haring off after Charlie  — but not
without notifying what Andy thought of as the Removal People (and in his mind's eye he 
even saw them that way, smooth-faced young men dressed in white coveralls). And
sometime after he had gone haring off after Charlie, maybe as short a time as five
minutes, but almost surely no longer than an hour, the Removal People would have rolled 
up to his door. While Conifer Place dozed the afternoon away, Vicky had been Removed.
    They might even have reasoned  — correctly — that a missing wife would have been
more of a problem for Andy than a provably dead one. No body, no estimated time of
death. No estimated time of death, no alibi. He would be watched, cosseted, politely tied 
down. Of course they would have put Charlie's description out on the wire — Vicky's 
too, for that matter  — but Andy would not have been free to simply go tearing off on his 
own. So she had been Removed, and now he didn't even know where she was buried. Or 
maybe she had been cremated. Or —
    Oh shit why are you doing this to yourself?
    He stood up abruptly and poured the remainder of Granther's mule-kick over the deck 
railing. It was all in the past; none of it could be changed; it was time to stop thinking
about it.
    A neat trick if you could do it.
    He looked up at the dark shapes of the trees and squeezed the glass tightly in his right 
hand, and the thought crossed his mind again. ,
    Charlie I swear to you, somehow it's gonna be all right.
6
That winter in Tashmore, so long after his miserable awakening in that Ohio motel, it
seemed his desperate prediction had finally come true. It was not an idyllic winter for
them. Not long after Christmas, Charlie caught a cold and snuffled and coughed her way
through to early April, when it finally cleared up for good. For a while she  ran a fever. 
Andy fed her aspirin halves and told himself that if the fever did not go down in three
days' time, he would have to take her to the doctor across the lake in Bradford, no matter 
what the consequences. But her fever did go down, and for the rest of the winter Charlie's 
cold was only a constant annoyance to her. Andy managed to get himself a minor case of 
frostbite on one memorable occasion in March and nearly managed to burn them both up 
one screaming, subzero night in February by overloading  the woodstove. Ironically, it
was Charlie who woke up in the middle of the night and discovered the cottage was much 
too hot.
    On December 14 they celebrated his birthday and on March 24 they celebrated
Charlie's. She was eight, and sometimes Andy looked at her with a kind of wonder, as if 
catching sight of her for the first time. She was not a little girl anymore; she stood to past 
his elbow. Her hair had got long again, and she had taken to braiding it to keep it out of 
her eyes. She was going to be beautiful. She already was, red nose and all.
    They were without a car. Irv Manders's Willys had frozen solid in January, and Andy 
thought the block was cracked. He had started it every day, more from a sense of
responsibility than anything else, because  not even four-wheel drive would have pulledthem out of Granther's camp after the New Year. The snow, undisturbed except for the 
tracks of squirrels, chipmunks, a few deer, and a persistent raccoon that came around to 
sniff' hopefully at the garbage hold, was almost two feet deep by then.    There were old-fashioned cross-country skis in the small shed behind the cottage —
three pairs of them, but none that would fit Charlie. It was just as well. Andy kept her 
indoors as much as possible. They could live with her cold, but he did not want to risk a 
return of the fever.
    He found an old pair of Granther's ski boots, dusty and cracked with age, tucked away 
in a cardboard toilet-tissue box under the table where the old man had once planed
shutters and made doors. Andy oiled them, flexed them, and then found he still could not 
fill Granther's shoes without stuffing the toes full of newspaper. There was something
funny about that, but he also found it a touch ominous. He thought about Granther a lot 
that long winter and wondered what he would have made of their predicament.
    Half a dozen times that winter he hooked up the cross-country skis (no modern snap  —
bindings here, only a confusing and irritating tangle of straps, buckles, and rings) and
worked his way across the wide, frozen expanse of Tashmore Pond to the Bradford Town 
Landing. From there, a small, winding road led into the village, tucked neatly away in the 
hills two miles east of the lake.
    He always left before first light, with Granther's knapsack on his back, and never
arrived back before three in the afternoon. On one occasion he barely beat a howling
snowstorm that would have left him blinded and directionless and wandering on the ice.
Charlie cried with relief when he came in — and then went into a long, alarming
coughing fit.
    The trips to Bradford were for supplies and clothes for him and Charlie. He had
Granther's struttin money, and later on, he broke into three of the larger camps at the far 
end of Tashmore Pond and stole money. He was not proud of this, but it seemed to him a 
matter of survival. The camps he chose might have sold on the real-estate market for
eighty thousand dollars apiece, and he supposed the owners could afford to lose their
thirty or forty dollars' worth of cookie-jar money — which was exactly where most of
them kept it. The only other thing he touched that winter was the large range-oil drum
behind the large, modern cottage quaintly named CAMP CONFUSION. From this drum
he took about forty gallons of oil.
    He didn't like going to Bradford. He didn't like the certain knowledge that the oldsters 
who sat around the big potbellied stove down by the cash register were talking about the 
stranger who was staying across the lake in one of the camps. Stories had a way of
getting around, and sometimes they got into the wrong ears. It wouldn't take much —
only a whisper — for the Shop to make an inevitable connection between Andy, his
grandfather, and his grandfather's cottage in Tashmore, Vermont. But he simply didn't
know  what else to do. They had to eat, and they couldn't spend the entire winter living on 
canned sardines. He wanted fresh fruit for Charlie, and vitamin pills, and clothes. Charlie 
had arrived with nothing to her name but a dirty blouse, a pair of red pants,  and a single 
pair of underdrawers. There was no cough medicine that he trusted, there were no fresh
vegetables, and, crazily enough, hardly any matches. Every camp he broke into had a
fireplace, but he found only a single box of Diamond wooden matches.
    He could have gone farther afield  — there were other camps and cottages  — but many 
of the other areas were plowed out and patrolled by the Tashmore constabulary. And onmany of the roads there were at least one or two year-round residents.
    In the Bradford general store he was able to buy all the things he needed, including
three pairs of heavy pants and three woolen shirts that were approximately Charlie's size. 
There was no girls' underwear, and she had to make do with size-eight Jockey shorts. 
This disgusted and amused Charlie by turns.
    Making the six-mile round trip across to Bradford on Granther's skis was both a burden 
and a pleasure to Andy. He didn't like leaving Charlie alone, not because he didn't trust 
her but because he always lived with  the fear of coming back and finding her gone . . . or 
dead. The old boots gave him blisters no matter how many pairs of socks he put on. If he 
tried to move too fast, he gave himself headaches, and then he would remember the small 
numb places on his face  and envision his brain as an old bald tire, a tire that had been
used so long and hard that it was down to the canvas in places. If he had a stroke in the 
middle of this damned lake and froze to death, what would happen to Charlie then?
    But he did his best thinking on these trips. The silence had a way of clearing the head. 
Tashmore Pond itself was not wide  — Andy's path across it from the west bank to the 
east was less than a mile  — but it was very long. With the snow lying four feet deep over 
the ice  by February, he sometimes paused halfway across and looked slowly to his right 
and left. The lake then appeared to be a long corridor floored with dazzling white tile  —
clean, unbroken, stretching out of sight in either direction. Sugar-dusted pines bordered it 
all around. Above was the hard, dazzling, and merciless blue sky of winter, or the low
and featureless white of coming snow. There might be the far-off call of a crow, or the 
low, rippling thud of the ice stretching, but that was all. The exercise toned up his body. 
He grew a warm singlet of sweat between his skin and his clothes, and it felt good to
work up a sweat and then wipe it off your brow. He had somehow forgotten that feeling
while teaching Yeats and Williams and correcting bluebooks.
    In  this silence, and through the exertion of working his body hard, his thoughts came
clear and he worked the problem over in his mind. Something had to be done  — should 
have been done long since, but that was in the past. They had come to Granther's place 
for the winter, but they were still running. The uneasy way he felt about the oldtimers
sitting around the stove with their pipes and their inquisitive eyes was enough to ram that 
fact home. He and Charlie were in a corner, and there had to be some way out of it.
    And he was still angry, because it wasn't right. They had no right. His family were 
American citizens, living in a supposedly open society, and his wife had been murdered, 
his daughter kidnapped, the two of them hunted like rabbits in a hedgerow.
    He thought again that if he could get the story across to someone — or to several
someones  — the whole thing could be blown out of the water. He hadn't done it before 
because that odd hypnosis  — the same sort of hypnosis that had resulted in Vicky's death 
— had continued, at least to some degree. He hadn't wanted his daughter growing up like 
a freak in a sideshow. He hadn't wanted her institutionalized  — not for the good of the 
country and not for her own good. And worst of all, he had continued to lie  to himself. 
Even after he had seen his wife crammed into the ironing closet in the laundry with that 
rag in her mouth, he had continued to lie to himself and tell himself that sooner or later 
they would be left alone.  Just playing for funzies,  they had said as kids. Everybody has to 
give back the money at the end.
    Except they weren't kids, they weren't playing for funzies, and nobody was going to
give him and Charlie anything back when the game was over. This game was for keeps.    In silence he began  to understand certain hard truths. In a way, Charlie  was a freak, not 
much different from the thalidomide babies of the sixties or those children of mothers
who had taken DES; the doctors just hadn't known that those girl children were going to 
develop vaginal tumors in abnormal numbers fourteen or sixteen years down the road. It 
was not Charlie's fault, but that did not change the fact. Her strangeness, her freakishness, 
was simply on the inside. What she had done at the Manders farm had been terrifying,
totally terrifying, and since then Andy had found himself wondering just how far her
ability reached, how far it could reach. He had read a lot of the literature of
parapsychology during their year on the dodge, enough to know that both pyrokinesis and 
telekinesis were suspected to be tied in with certain poorly understood ductless glands.
His reading had also told him that the two talents were closely related, and that most
documented cases centered around girls not a whole lot older than Charlie was right now.
    She had been able to initiate that destruction at the Manders farm at the age of seven. 
Now she was nearly eight. What might happen when she turned twelve and entered
adolescence? Maybe nothing. Maybe a great deal. She said she wasn't going to use the 
power anymore, but if she was forced to use it? What if it began to come out
spontaneously? What if she began to light fires in her sleep as a part of her own strange 
puberty, a fiery counterpart of the nocturnal seminal emissions most teenage boys
experienced? What if the Shop finally decided to call off its dogs... and Charlie was
kidnapped by some foreign power?
    Questions, questions.
    On his trips across the pond, Andy tried to grapple with them and came reluctantly to 
believe that Charlie might have to submit to some sort of custody for the rest of her life, 
if only for her own protection. It might be as necessary for her as the cruel leg braces 
were for the victims of muscular dystrophy or the strange prosthetics for the thalidomide 
babies.
    And then there was the question of his own future. He remembered the numb places, 
the bloodshot eye. No man wants to believe that his own death-warrant has been signed 
and dated, and Andy did not completely believe that, but he was aware that two or three 
more hard pushes might kill him, and he realized that his normal life expectancy might
already have been considerably shortened. Some provision had to be made for Charlie in
case that happened.
    But not the Shop's way.
    Not the small room. He would not allow that to happen.
    So he thought it over, and at last he came to a painful decision.
7
Andy wrote six letters. They were almost identical. Two were to Ohio's United States
senators. One was to the woman who represented the district of which Harrison was a 
part in the U.S. House of Representatives. One was to the New York  Times. One was to 
the Chicago  Tribune. And one was to the Toledo  Blade. All six letters told the story of 
what had happened, beginning with the experiment in Jason Gearneigh Hall and ending
with his and Charlie's enforced isolation on Tashmore Pond.
    When he had finished, he gave one of the letters to Charlie to read. She went through it slowly and carefully, taking almost an hour. It was the first time she had got the entire 
story, from beginning to end.
    'You're going to mail these?' she asked when she finished.
    'Yes,' he said. 'Tomorrow. I think tomorrow will be the last time I dare go across the 
pond.' It had at last begun to warm up a little. The ice was still solid, but it creaked 
constantly now, and he didn't know how much longer it would be safe.
    'What will happen, Daddy?'
    He shook his head. 'I don't know for sure. All I can do is hope that once the story is 
out, those people who have been chasing us will have to give it up.'
    Charlie nodded soberly. 'You should have done it before.'
    'Yes,' he said, knowing that she was thinking of the near cataclysm at the Manders
farm last October. 'Maybe I should have. But I never had a chance to think much,
Charlie. Keeping us going was all I had time to think about. And what thinking you do 
get a chance to do when you're on the run . . . well, mostly it's stupid thinking. I kept 
hoping they'd give up and leave us alone. That was a terrible mistake.'    'They won't make me go away, will they?' Charlie asked. 'From you, I mean. We can
stay together, can't we, Daddy?'
    'Yes,' he said, not wanting to tell her that his conception of what might happen after the 
letters were mailed and received was probably as vague as hers. It was just 'after.'
    'Then that's all I care about. And I'm not going to make anymore fires.'
    'All right,' he said, and touched her hair. His throat was suddenly thick with a
premonitory dread, and something that had happened near here suddenly occurred to him, 
something that he hadn't thought of for years. He had been out with his father and
Granther, and Granther had given Andy his .22, which he called his varmint rifle, when
Andy clamored for it. Andy had seen a squirrel and wanted to shoot it. His dad had 
started to protest, and Granther had hushed him with an odd little smile.
    Andy had aimed the way Granther taught him; he squeezed the trigger rather than just 
jerking back on it (as Granther had also taught him), and he shot the squirrel. It tumbled 
off its limb like a stuffed toy, and Andy ran excitedly for it after handing the gun back to 
Granther. Up close, he had been struck dumb by what he saw. Up close, the squirrel was 
no stuffed toy. It wasn't dead. He had got it in the  hindquarters and it lay there dying in its 
own bright dapples of blood, its black eyes awake and alive and full of a horrible
suffering. Its fleas, knowing the truth already, were trundling off the body in three busy
little lines.
    His throat had closed with a snap, and at the age of nine, Andy tasted for the first time 
that bright, painty flavor of self-loathing. He stared numbly at his messy kill, aware that 
leis father and grandfather were standing behind him, their shadows lying over him —
three generations of McGees standing over a murdered squirrel in the Vermont woods.
And behind him, Granther said softly,  Well, you done it, Andy. How do you like it? And 
the tears had come suddenly, overwhelming him, the hot tears of horror and realization
— the realization that once it's done, it's done. He swore suddenly that he would never 
kill anything with a gun again. He swore it before God.
    I'm not going to make anymore fires, Charlie had     said, and in his mind Andy heard 
Granther's reply to him on the day he had shot the squirrel, the day he had sworn to God 
he would never do anything like that again.  Never say that, Andy. God loves to make a 
man break a vow. It keeps him properly humble about his place in the world and his sense of self-control. About what Irv Manders had said to Charlie.
    Charlie had found a complete set of Bomba the Jungle Boy books in the attic and was 
working her way slowly but surely through them. Now Andy looked at her, sitting in a
dusty shaft of sunlight in the old black rocker, sitting just where his grandmother had
always sat, usually with a basket of mending between her feet, and he struggled with an
urge to tell her to take it back, to take it back while she still could, to tell her that she 
didn't understand. the terrible temptation: if the gun was left there long enough, sooner or 
later you would pick it up again. 
    God loves to make a man break a vow.
8
No one saw Andy mail his letters except Charles Payson, the fellow who had moved into 
Bradford in November and  had since been trying to make a go of the old Bradford
Notions 'n' Novelties shop. Payson was a small, sad-faced man who had tried to buy
Andy a drink on one of his visits to town. In the town itself, the expectation was that if
Payson didn't make it work during the coming summer, Notions 'n' Novelties would have 
a FOR SALE OR LEASE sign back in the window by September 15. He was a nice 
enough fellow, but he was having a hard scrabble. Bradford wasn't the town it used to be.
    Andy walked up the street  —  he had left his skis stuck in the snow at the head of the 
road leading down to the Bradford Town Landing — and approached the general store. 
Inside, the oldsters watched him with mild interest. There had been a fair amount of talk 
about Andy that winter. The consensus about yonder man there was that he was on the 
run from something — a bankruptcy, maybe, or a divorce settlement. Maybe an angry
wife who had been cheated out of custody of the kid: the small clothes Andy had bought 
hadn't been — lost on them.  The consensus was also that he and the kid had maybe
broken into one of the camps across the Pond and were spending the winter there.
Nobody brought this possibility up to Bradford's constable, a Johnny-come-lately who
had lived in town for only twelve years and thought he owned the place. Yonder man
came from across the lake, from Tashmore, from Vermont. None of the old-timers who 
sat around Jake Rowley's stove in the Bradford general store had much liking for
Vermont ways, them with their income tax and their snooty bottle law and that fucking
Russian laid up in his house like a Czar, writing books no one could understand.
    Let Vermonters handle their own problems, was the unanimous, if unstated, view.
    'He won't be crossin the pond much longer,' one  of them said. He took another bite 
from his Milky Way bar and began to gum it.
    'Not less he's got him a pair of water wings,' another answered, and they all chuckled.
    'We won't be seein him much longer,' Jake said complacently as Andy approached the 
store. Andy was wearing Granther's old coat and a blue wool band pulled over his ears, 
and some memory — perhaps a family resemblance going back to Granther himself —
danced fleetingly in Jake's mind and then blew away. 'When the ice starts to go out, he'll 
just dry up and blow away. Him and whoever he's keepin over there.'
    Andy stopped outside, unslung his pack, and took out several letters. Then he came
inside. The men forgathered there examined their nails, their watches, the old Pearl Kineo 
stove  itself. One of them took out a gigantic blue railroad bandanna and hawked mightilyinto it.
    Andy glanced around. 'Morning, gentlemen.'
    'Mawnin to you,' Jake Rowley said. 'Get you anything?'
    'You sell stamps, don't you?'
    'Oh yes, Gov'ment trust me that far.'
    'I'd like six fifteens, please.'
    Jake produced them, tearing them carefully from one of the sheets in his old black
postage book. 'Something else for you today.'
    Andy thought, then smiled. It was the tenth of March. Without answering Jake, he
went to the card rack beside the coffee grinder and picked out a large, ornate birthday
card. TO YOU, DAUGHTER, ON YOUR SPECIAL DAY, it said. He brought it back 
and paid for it.
    'Thanks,' Jake said, and rang it up.
    'Very welcome,' Andy replied, and went out. They watched him adjust his headband, 
then stamp his letters one by one. The breath smoked out of his nostrils. They watched 
him go around the building to where the postbox stood, but none of them sitting around 
the stove could have testified in court as to whether or not he mailed those letters. He 
came back into view shouldering into his pack.
    'Off he goes,' one of the old-timers remarked.
    'Civil enough fella,' Jake said, and that closed the subject. Talk turned to other matters.
    Charles Payson stood in the doorway of his store, which hadn't done three hundred
dollars' worth of custom all winter long, and watched Andy go. Payson could have
testified that the letters had been mailed; he had stood right here and watched him drop 
them into the slot in a bunch.
    When Andy disappeared from sight, Payson went back inside and through the doorway 
behind the counter where he sold penny candy and Bang caps and bubble gum and into 
the living quarters behind. His telephone had a scrambler device attached to it. Payson
called Virginia for instructions.
9
There was and is no post office in Bradford, New Hampshire (or in Tashmore, Vermont, 
for that matter); both towns were too small. The nearest post office to Bradford was in
Teller, New Hampshire. At one-fifteen P.m. on that March 10, the small postal truck
from Teller pulled up in front of the general store and the postman emptied the mail from
the standing box around to the side where Jake had pumped jenny gas until 1970. The
deposited mail consisted of Andy's six letters and a postcard from Miss Shirley Devine, a 
fifty-year-old maiden lady, to her sister in Tampa, Florida. Across the lake, Andy McGee 
was taking a nap and Charlie McGee was building a snowman.
    The postman,  Robert Everett, put the mail in a bag, swung the bag into the back of his 
blue and white truck, and then drove on to Williams, another small New Hampshire town 
in Teller's zip-code area. Then he  U-turned in the middle of what the Williams residents 
laughingly called Main Street and started back to Teller, where all the mail would be
sorted and sent on at about three o'clock that afternoon. Five miles outside of town, a
beige Chevrolet Caprice was parked across the road, blocking both of the narrow lanes. Everett parked by the snowbank and got out of his truck to see if he could help.
    Two men approached him from the car. They showed him their credentials and
explained what they wanted.
    'No!' Everett said. He tried on a laugh and it came out sounding  incredulous, as if
someone had just told him they were going to open Tashmore Beach for swimming this 
very afternoon.
    'If you doubt we are who we say we are  — ' one of them began. This was Orville 
Jamieson, sometimes known as OJ, sometimes known as The Juice. He didn't mind
dealing with this hick postman; he didn't mind anything as long as his orders didn't take 
him any closer than three miles to that hellish little girl.
    'No, it ain't that; it ain't that at all,' Robert Everett said. He was scared,  as scared as any 
man is when suddenly confronted with the force of the government, when gray
enforcement bureaucracy suddenly takes on a real face, like something grim and solid
swimming up out of a crystal ball. He was determined nonetheless. 'But what I  got here is 
the mail. The U.S. mail. You guys must understand that.'
    'This is a matter of national security,' OJ said. After the fiasco in Hastings Glen, a
protective corden had been thrown around the Manders place. The grounds and the
remains of the  house had got the fine-tooth-comb treatment. As a result, OJ had
recovered The Windsucker, which now rested comfortably against the left side of his
chest.
    'You say so, but that ain't good enough,' Everett said.
    OJ unbuttoned his Carroll Reed parka so that Robert Everett could see The
Windsucker. Everett's eyes widened, and OJ smiled a little. ''Now, you don't want me to 
pull this, do you?'
    Everett couldn't believe this was happening. He tried one last time. 'Do you guys know 
the penalty for robbing the U.S. mail? They put you in Leavenworth, Kansas, for that.'
    'You can clear it with your postmaster when you get back to Teller,' the other man said, 
speaking for the first time. 'Now let's quit this fucking around, okay? Give us the bag of
out-of-town mail.'
    Everett gave him the small sack of mail from Bradford and Williams. They opened it
right there on the road and sorted through it impersonally. Robert Everett felt anger and a 
kind of sick shame. What they were doing wasn't right, not even if it was the secrets of 
the nuclear bomb in there. Opening the U.S. mail by the side of the road wasn't right.
Ludicrously, he found himself feeling about the same way he would have felt if a strange 
man had come barging into his house and pulled off his wife's clothes.    'You guys are going to hear about this,' he said in a choked, scared voice. 'You'll see.'
    'Here they are,' the other fellow said to OJ. He handed him six letters, all addressed in 
the same careful hand. Robert Everett recognized them well enough. They had come
from the box at the Bradford general store. OJ put the letters in his pocket and the two of 
them walked back to their Caprice, leaving the opened bag of mail on the road. 'You guys 
are going to hear about this!' Everett cried in a shaking voice.
    Without looking back, OJ said, 'Speak to your postmaster before you speak to anyone 
else. If you want to keep your Postal Service pension, that is.'
    They drove away. Everett watched them go, raging, scared, sick to his stomach.  At last 
he picked up the mailbag and tossed it back into the truck.
    'Robbed,' he said, surprised to find he was near tears. 'Robbed, I been robbed, ohgoddammit, I been robbed.'
    He drove back to Teller as fast as the slushy roads would allow. He spoke to his 
postmaster, as the men had suggested. The Teller postmaster was Bill Cobham, and
Everett was in Cobham's office for better than an hour. At times their voices came
through the office door, loud and angry.
    Cobham was fifty-six. He had been with the Postal Service for thirty-five years, and he 
was badly scared. At last he succeeded in communicating his fright to Robert Everett as 
well. And Everett never said a word, not even to his wife, about the day he had been
robbed on the Teller Road between Bradford and Williams. But he never forgot it, and he 
never completely lost that sense of anger and shame . . . and disillusion.
10
By two-thirty Charlie had finished her snowman, and Andy, a little rested from his nap, 
had got up. Orville Jamieson  and his new partner, George Sedaka, were on an airplane. 
Four hours later, As Andy and Charlie were sitting down to a game of five hundred
rummy, the supper dishes washed and drying in the drainer, the letters were on Cap
Hollister's desk.Cap and Rainbird
1
On March 24, Charlie McGee's birthday, Cap Hollister sat behind his desk filled with a 
great and ill-defined unease. The  reason for the unease was not ill-defined; he expected 
John Rainbird in not quite an hour, and that was too much like expecting the devil to turn 
up on the dime. So to speak. And at least the devil stuck to a bargain once it was struck, if 
you believed his press releases, but Cap had always felt there was something in John
Rainbird's personality that was fundamentally ungovernable.  When all was said and done, 
he was nothing more than a hit man, and hit men always self-destruct sooner or later. Cap 
felt that when Rainbird went, it would be with a spectacular bang. Exactly how much did 
he know about the McGee operation? No more than he  had to, surely, but . . . it nagged at 
him. Not for the first time he wondered if after this McGee affair was over it might not be 
wise to arrange an accident for the big Indian. In the memorable words of Cap's father, 
Rainbird was as crazy as a man eating rat turds and calling it caviar.    He sighed. Outside, a cold rain flew against the windows, driven by a strong wind. His 
study, so bright and pleasant in summer, was now filled with shifting gray shadows. They
were not kind to him as he sat here with  the McGee file on its library trolley at his left 
hand. The winter had aged him; he was not the same jaunty man who had biked up to the 
front door on that day in October when the McGees had escaped again, leaving a
firestorm behind. Lines on his face that  had been barely noticeable then had now
deepened into fissures. He had been forced into the humiliation of bifocals  — old man's 
glasses, he thought them — and adjusting to them had left him feeling nauseated for the 
first six weeks he wore them. These were the small things, the outward symbols of the 
way things had gone so crazily, maddeningly wrong. These were the things he bitched
about to himself because all of his training and upbringing had schooled him against
bitching about the grave matters that lay so closely below the surface.    As if that damned little girl were a personal jinx, the only two women he had cared
deeply about since the death of his mother had both died of cancer this winter  — his wife, 
Georgia, three days after Christmas, and his personal secretary, Rachel, only a little over 
a month ago.
    He had known Georgia was gravely ill, of course; a mastectomy fourteen months
before her death had slowed but not stopped the progress of the disease. Rachel's death
had been a cruel surprise.  Near the end he could remember (how unforgivable we
sometimes seem in retrospect) joking that she needed fattening up, and Rachel throwing
the jokes right back at him.
    Now all he had left was the Shop — and he might not have that much longer. An
insidious sort of cancer had invaded Cap himself. What would you call it? Cancer of the 
confidence? Something like that. And in the upper echelons, that sort of disease was
nearly always fatal. Nixon, Lance, Helms . . . all victims of cancer of the credibility.
   He opened the McGee file and took out the latest additions  — the six letters Andy had 
mailed less than two weeks ago. He shuffled through them without reading them. They
were all essentially the same letter and he had the contents almost by heart. Below them 
were glossy photographs, some taken by Charles Payson, some taken by other agents onthe Tashmore side of the Pond. There were photos showing Andy walking up Bradford's 
main street. Photos of Andy shopping in the general store and paying for his purchases. 
Photos of Andy and Charlie standing by the boathouse at the camp, Irv Manders's Willys 
a snow-covered hump in the background. A photo showing Charlie sliding down a hard 
and sparkling incline of snow-crust on a flattened cardboard box, her hair flying out from 
beneath a knitted cap that was too large for her. In this photo her father was standing
behind her, mittened hands on hips, head thrown back, bellowing laughter. Cap had
looked at this photo often and long and soberly and was sometimes surprised by a
trembling in his hands when he put it aside. He wanted them that badly.    He got up and went to the window for a moment. No Rich McKeon cutting grass
today. The alders were bare and skeletal, the duckpond between the two houses a
slatelike, bare  expanse. There were dozens of important items on the Shop's plate this
early spring, a veritable smorgasbord, but for Cap there was really only one, and that was 
the matter of Andy McGee and his daughter Charlene.
    The Manders fiasco had done a lot of damage. The Shop had ridden that out, and so 
had he, but it had begun a critical groundswell that would break soon enough. The critical 
centre of that groundswell was the way the McGees had been handled from the day
Victoria McGee had been killed and the daughter lifted  — lifted however briefly. A lot of 
the criticism had to do with the fact that a college instructor who had never even been in 
the army had been able to take his daughter away from two trained Shop agents, leaving
one of them mad and one in a coma that had lasted for six months. The latter agent was 
never going to be any good for anything again; if anyone spoke the word 'sleep' within
his earshot, he keeled over bonelessly and might stay out from four hours to an entire
day. In a bizarre sort of way it was funny.
    The other major criticism had to do with the fact that the McGees had managed to stay 
one step ahead for so long. It made the Shop look bad. It made them all look dumb.
    But most of the criticism was reserved for the incident at  the Manders farm itself,
because that had damned near blown the entire agency out of the water. Cap knew that 
the whispering had begun. The whispering, the memos, maybe even the testimony at the 
ultrasecret congressional hearings. We don't want him hanging on like Hoover. This
Cuban business went entirely by the boards because he couldn't get his head out of that 
damned McGee file. Wife died very recently, you know. Great shame. Hit him hard. 
Whole McGee business nothing but a catalogue of ineptitude. Perhaps a younger man . . .
    But none of them understood what they were up against. They thought they did, but
they didn't. Again and again he had seen the rejection of the simple fact that the little girl
was a pyrokinetic  — a firestarter. Literally dozens of reports suggested that the fire at the 
Manders farm had been started by a gasoline spill, by the woman's breaking a kerosene 
lamp, by spontaneous-fucking-combustion, and God only knew what other nonsense.
Some of those reports came from people who had been there.
    Standing at the window, Cap found himself perversely wishing that Wanless were
here. Wanless had understood. He could have talked to Wanless about this . . . this
dangerous blindness.
    He went back to the desk. There was no sense kidding himself; once the undermining 
process began, there was no way to stop it. It really was like a cancer. You could retard 
its growth by calling in favors (and Cap had called in ten years' worth just to keep himself 
in the saddle this last winter); you might  even be able to force it into remission. Butsooner or later, you were gone. He felt he had from now until July if he played the game 
by the rules, from now until maybe November if he decided to really dig in and get
tough. That, however, might mean ripping the agency apart at the seams, and he did not 
want to do that. He had no wish to destroy something he had invested half his life in. But 
he would if he had to: he was going to see this through to the end.
    The major factor that had allowed him to stay  in control was the speed with which they 
had located the McGees again. Cap was glad to take credit for that since it helped to prop 
up his position, but all it had really taken was computer time.
    They had been living with this business long enough to  have time to plow the McGee 
field both wide and deep. Filed away in the computer were facts on more than two
hundred relatives and four hundred friends all the way around the McGee Tomlinson
family tree. These friendships stretched all the way back to Vicky's best friend in the first 
grade, a girl named Kathy Smith, who was now Mrs. Frank Worthy, of Cabral,
California, and who had probably not spared a thought for Vicky Tomlinson in twenty
years or more.
    The computer was given the 'last-seen' data and promptly spit out a list of probabilities. 
Heading the list was the name of Andy's deceased grandfather, who had owned a camp 
on Tashmore Pond in Vermont; ownership had since passed to Andy. The McGees had 
vacationed there, and it was within reasonable striking distance of the Manders farm by
way of the back roads. The computer felt that if Andy and Charlie were to make for any 
'known place,' it would be this place.
    Less than a week after they had moved into Granther's, Cap knew they were there. A 
loose cordon of agents was set up around the camp. Arrangements had been made for the 
purchase of Notions 'n' Novelties in Bradford on the probability that whatever shopping
they needed to do would be done in Bradford.
    Passive surveillance, nothing more. All the photographs had been taken with telephoto 
lenses under optimum conditions for concealment. Cap had no intention of risking
another firestorm.
    They could have taken Andy quietly on any of his trips across the lake. They could
have shot them both as easily as they had got the picture of Charlie sledding on the
cardboard carton. But Cap wanted the girl, and he had now come to believe that if they
were going to have any real control over her, they would need her father as well.
    After locating them  again, the most important objective had been to make sure they
kept quiet. Cap didn't need a computer to tell him that as Andy grew more frightened, the 
chances that he would seek outside help went up and up. Before the Manders affair, a 
press leak could have been handled or lived with. Afterward, press interference became a 
different ballgame altogether. Cap had nightmares just thinking about what would happen
if the New York Times got hold of such a thing.
    For a brief period, during the confusion that had followed the firestorm, Andy could 
have got his letters out. But apparently the McGees had been living with their own
confusion. Their golden chance to mail the letters or make some phone calls had passed 
unused . . . and very well mightn't have come to anything, anyway. The woods were full 
of crackpots these days, and newspeople were as cynical as anyone else. Theirs had
become a glamour occupation. They were more interested in what Margaux and Bo and 
Suzanne and Cheryl were doing. It was safer.
    Now the two of them were in a box. Cap had had the entire winter to consider options. Even at his wife's funeral he had been running through his options. Gradually he had
settled upon a plan of action and now he was prepared to tip that plan into motion.
Payson, their man in Bradford, said that the ice was getting ready to go out on Tashmore 
Pond. And McGee had finally mailed his letters. Already he would be getting impatient
for a response  — and perhaps beginning to suspect his letters had never arrived at their 
intended sources. They might be getting ready to move, and Cap liked them right where 
they were.
    Beneath the photos was a thick typed report better than three hundred pages  — bound 
in a blue TOP SECRET cover. Eleven doctors and psychologists had put the combination 
report and prospectus together under the overall direction of Dr. Patrick Hockstetter, a
clinical psychologist and psychotherapist. He was, in Cap's opinion, one of the ten or
twelve most astute minds at the Shop's disposal. At the eight hundred thousand dollars it 
had cost the taxpayer to put the report together, he ought to have been. Thumbing through 
the report now, Cap wondered what Wanless, that old doomsayer, would have made of it.
    His own intuition that they needed Andy alive  was confirmed in here. The postulate
Hockstetter's crew had based their own chain of logic on was the idea that all the powers 
they were interested in were exercised voluntarily, having their first cause in the
willingness of the possessor to use them . . . and the key word was will.
    The girl's powers, of which pyrokinesis was only the cornerstone, had a way of getting 
out of control, of jumping nimbly over the barriers of her will, but this study, which
incorporated all the available information, indicated that it was the girl herself who
elected whether or not to set things in motion — as she had done at the Manders farm 
when she realized that the Shop agents were trying to kill her father.    He rifled through the recap of the original Lot Six experiment. All the graphs and
computer readouts boiled down to the same thing: will as the first cause.
    Using will as the basis for everything. Hockstetter and his colleagues had gone through 
an amazing catalogue of drugs before deciding on Thorazine for Andy and a new drug
called Orasin for the girl. Seventy pages of gobbledy-gook in the report came down to the 
fact that the drugs would make them feel high, dreamy, floaty. Neither of them would be 
able to exercise enough will to choose between chocolate milk and white, let alone
enough to start fires or convince people they were blind, or whatever.    They could keep Andy McGee drugged constantly. They had no real use for him; both 
the report and Cap's own intuition suggested that he was a dead end, a burned-out case. It 
was the girl who interested them. Give me six months, Cap thought, and we'll have
enough. Just long enough to map the terrain inside that amazing little head. No House or 
Senate subcommittee would be able to resist the promise of chemically  induced psi
powers and the enormous implications it would have on the arms race if that little girl
was even half of what Wanless suspected.
    And there were other possibilities. They were not in the blue-backed report, because 
they were too explosive for even a TOP SECRET heading. Hockstetter, who had become 
progressively more excited as the picture took shape before him and his committee of
experts, had mentioned one of these possibilities to Cap only a week ago.
    'This Z factor,' Hockstetter said. 'Have you considered any of the ramifications if it
turns out that the child isn't a mule but a genuine mutation?' Cap had, although he did not 
tell Hockstetter that. It raised the interesting question of eugenics . . . the potentially
explosive question of eugenics, with its lingering connotations of Nazism and superraces— all the things Americans had fought World War II to put an end to. But it was one 
thing to sink a philosophical well and produce a gusher of bullshit about usurping the
power of God and quite another to produce laboratory evidence that the offspring of Lot 
Six parents might be human torches, levitators, tele- or telempaths, or God only knew
what else. Ideals were cheap things to hold as long as there were no solid arguments for 
their overthrow. If there were, what then? Human breeding farms? As crazy as it
sounded, Cap could visualize it. It could be the key to everything. World peace, or world 
domination, and when you got rid of the trick mirrors of rhetoric and bombast, weren't
they really the same thing?
    It was a whole can of worms. The possibilities stretched a dozen years into the future. 
Cap knew the best he himself could realistically hope for was six months, but it might be 
enough to set policy — to survey the land on which the  tracks would be laid and the 
railroad would run. It would be his legacy to the country and to the world. Measured
against this, the lives of a runaway college instructor and his ragamuffin daughter were
less than dust in the wind.
    The girl could not be tested and observed with any degree of validity if she was
constantly drugged, but her father would be their hostage to fortune. And on the few
occasions they wanted to run tests on him, the reverse would hold. It was a simple system 
of levers. And as Archimedes had observed, a lever long enough would move the world.
    The intercom buzzed.
    'John Rainbird is here,' the new girl said. Her usual bland receptionist's tone was
threadbare enough to show the fear beneath.
    On that one I don't blame you, babe, Cap thought.
    'Send him in, please.'
2
Same old Rainbird.
    He came in slowly, dressed in a brown and balding leather jacket over a faded plaid 
shirt. Old and scuffed Dingos peeked out from beneath the cuff's of his faded straight-leg 
jeans. The top of his huge head seemed almost to brush the ceiling. The gored ruin of his 
empty eye-socket made Cap shudder inwardly.
    'Cap,' he said, and sat down. 'I have been in the desert too long.'    'I've heard about your Flagstaff house,' Cap said. 'And your shoe collection.'
    John Rainbird only stared at him unblinkingly with his good eye.
    'How come I never see you in anything but those old shitkickers?' Cap asked.
    Rainbird smiled thinly and said nothing. The old unease filled Cap and he found 
himself wondering again how much Rainbird knew, and why it bothered him so much.
    'I have a job for you,' he said.
    'Good. Is it the one I want?'
    Cap looked at him, surprised, considering, and then said, 'I think it is.'
    'Then tell me, Cap.'
    Cap outlined the plan that would bring Andy and Charlie McGee to Longmont. It
didn't take long.
    'Can you use the gun?' he asked when he was finished.    'I can use any gun. And your plan is a good one. It will succeed.'
    'How nice of you to  give it your stamp of approval,' Cap said. He tried for light irony 
and only succeeded in sounding petulant. God damn the man anyway.
    'And I will fire the gun,' Rainbird said. 'On one condition.'
    Cap stood up, planted his hands on his desk, which was littered with components from 
the McGee file, and leaned toward Rainbird.
    'No,' he said. 'You don't make conditions with me:'
    'I do this time,' Rainbird said. 'But you will find it an easy one to fulfill, I think.'
    'No,' Cap repeated. Suddenly his heart was hammering in his chest, although with fear 
or anger he was not sure. 'You misunderstand. I am in charge of this agency and this
facility. I am your superior. I believe you spent enough time in the army to understand the 
concept of a superior officer.'
    'Yes,' Rainbird said, smiling, 'I scragged one or two in my time. Once directly on Shop 
orders. Your orders, Cap.'
    'Is that a threat?' Cap cried. Some part of him was aware that he was overreacting, but 
he seemed unable to help himself. 'God damn you, is that a threat? If it is, I think you've 
lost your senses completely! If I decide I don't want you to leave this building, all I have 
to do is press a button! There are thirty men who can fire that rifle — '
    'But none can fire it with such assurance as this one-eyed red nigger,' Rainbird said. 
His gentle tone had not changed. 'You think you have them now, Cap, but they are willo'-the-wisps. Whatever gods there are may not want you to have them. They may not
want you to set them down in your rooms of deviltry and emptiness. You have thought 
you had them before.' He pointed to the file material heaped on the library trolley and
then to the blue-backed folder. 'I've read the material. And I've read your Dr.
Hockstetter's report.'
    'The devil you have!' Cap exclaimed, but he could see the truth in Rainbird's face. He 
had. Somehow he had. Who gave it to him? he raged. Who?
    'Oh yes,' Rainbird said. 'I have what I want, when I want it. People give it to me. I 
think . . . it must be my pretty face.' His smile widened and became suddenly, horribly
predatory. His good eye rolled in its socket.
    'What are you saying to me?' Cap asked. He wanted a glass of water.    'Just that I have had a long time in Arizona to walk and smell the winds that blow . . . 
and for you, Cap, it smells bitter, like the wind off an alkali flat. I had time to do a lot of 
reading and a lot of thinking. And what I think is that I may be the only man in all the 
world who can surely bring those two here. And it may be that I am the only man in all 
the world who can do something with the little girl once she's here. Your fat report, your 
Thorazine and your Orasin — there may be more here than drugs can cope with. More 
dangers than you can understand.'
    Hearing Rainbird was like hearing the ghost of Wanless, and Cap was now in the grip 
of such fear and such fury that he couldn't speak.
    'I will do all this,' Rainbird said kindly. 'I will bring them here and you will do all your 
tests.' He was like a father giving a child permission to play with some new toy. 'On the 
condition that you give the girl to me for disposal when you are finished with her.'
    'You're mad,' Cap whispered.
    'How right you are,' Rainbird said, and laughed. 'So are you. Mad as a hatter. You sit 
here and make your plans for controlling a force beyond your comprehension. A forcethat belongs only to the gods themselves . . . and to this one little girl.' 'And what's to stop 
me from having you erased? Right here and now?'
    'My word,' Rainbird said, 'that if I disappear, such a shockwave of revulsion and
indignation will run through this country within the month that Watergate will look like
the filching of penny candy in comparison. My word that if I disappear, the Shop will
ceased to exist within six weeks, and that within six months you will stand before a judge 
for sentencing on crimes serious enough to keep you behind bars for the rest of your life.' 
He smiled again, showing crooked tombstone teeth. 'Do not doubt me, Cap. My days in
this reeking, putrescent vineyard have been long, and the vintage would be a bitter one
indeed.'
    Cap tried to laugh. What came out was a choked snarl.
    'For over ten years I have been putting my nuts and forage by,' Rainbird said serenely, 
'like any animal that has known winter and remembers it. I have such a potpourri, Cap  —
photos, tapes, Xerox copies of documents that would make the blood of our good friend 
John Q. Public run cold.'
    'None of that is possible,' Cap said, but he knew Rainbird was not bluffing, and he felt 
as if a cold, invisible hand were pressing down on his chest.
    'Oh, very possible,' Rainbird said. 'For the last three years I've been in a state of
information passing-gear, because for the last three years I've been able to tap into your 
computer whenever I liked. On a time-sharing basis, of course, which makes it expensive, 
but I have been able to pay. My wages have been very fine, and with investment they
have grown. I stand before you, Cap  — or sit, which is the truth, but less poetic — as a 
triumphant example of American free enterprise in action.'
    'No,' Cap said.
    'Yes,' Rainbird replied. 'I am John Rainbird, but I am also the U.S. Bureau for
Geological Understudies. Check, if you like. My computer code is AXON. Check the 
time-sharing codes in your main terminal. Take the elevator. I'll wait.' Rainbird crossed
his legs and the cuff' of his right pantsleg pulled up, revealing a rip and a bulge in a seam 
of one of his boots. He looked like a man who could wait out the age, if that were 
necessary.
    Cap's mind was whirling. 'Access to the computer on a time-sharing basis, perhaps.
That still doesn't tap you into — '
    'Go see Dr. Noftzieger,' Rainbird said kindly. 'Ask him how many ways there are to tap 
into a computer once you have access on a time-sharing basis. Two years ago, a bright 
twelve-year-old tapped into the USC computer. And by the way, I know your access
code, Cap. It's BROW this year. Last year it was RASP. I thought that was much more 
appropriate.'
    Cap sat and looked at Rainbird. His mind had divided, it seemed, had become a threering circus. Part of it was marveling that he had never heard John Rainbird say so much at 
one time. Part of it was trying to grapple with the idea that this maniac knew all of the 
Shop's business. A third part was remembering a Chinese curse, a curse that sounded
deceptively pleasant until you sat down and really thought about it. May you live in
interesting times. For the last year and a half he had lived in extremely interesting times. 
He felt that just one more interesting thing would drive him totally insane.
    And then he thought of Wanless again — with dragging, dawning, horror. He felt
almost as if . . . as if . . . he were turning into Wanless. Beset with demons on every side but helpless to fight them off or even to enlist help.
    'What do you want, Rainbird?'
    'I've told you already, Cap. I want nothing but your word that my involvement with this 
girl Charlene McGee will not end with the rifle but begin there.  I want to'  — Rainbird's 
eye darkened and became thoughtful, moody, introspective — 'I want to know her
intimately.'
    Cap looked at him, horror-struck.
    Rainbird understood suddenly, and he shook his head at Cap contemptuously. 'Not that 
intimately.  Not in the biblical sense. But I'll know her. She and I are going to be friends, 
Cap. If she is as powerful as all things indicate, she and I are going to be great friends.'
    Cap made a sound of humor: not a laugh, exactly; more of a shrill giggle.
    The expression of contempt on Rainbird's face did not change. 'No, of course you don't 
think that is possible. You look at my face and you see a monster. You look at my hands 
and see them covered with the blood you ordered me to spill. But I tell you, Cap,  it will 
happen. The girl has had no friend for going on two years. She has had her father and that 
is all. You see her as you see me, Cap. It is your great failing. You look, you see a
monster. Only in the girl's case, you see a useful monster. Perhaps this is because you are 
a white man. White men see monsters everywhere. White men look at their own pricks 
and see monsters.' Rainbird laughed again.
    Cap had at last begun to calm down and to think reasonably. 'Why should I allow it, 
even if all you say  is true? Your days are numbered and we both know it. You've been
hunting your own death for twenty years. Anything else has been incidental, only a
hobby. You'll find it soon enough. And then it ends for all of us. So why should I give 
you the pleasure of having what you want?'
    'Perhaps it's as you say. Perhaps I have been hunting my own death  — a more colorful 
phrase than I would have expected from you, Cap. Maybe you should have the fear of
God put into you more often.'
    'You're not my idea of God,' Cap said.
    Rainbird' grinned. 'More like the Christian devil, sure. But I tell you this — if I had 
really been hunting my own death, I believe I would have found it long before this.
Perhaps I've been stalking it for play. But I have no desire to bring you down, Cap, or the 
Shop, or U.S. domestic intelligence. I am no idealist. I only want this little girl. And you
may find you need me. You may find that I am able to accomplish things that all the
drugs in Dr. Hockstetter's cabinet will not.'
    'And in return?'
    'When the affair of the McGees ends, the U.S. Bureau for Geological Understudies will 
cease to exist. Your computer chief, Noftzieger, can change all his codings. And you,
Cap, will fly to Arizona with me on a public airline. We will enjoy a good dinner at my 
favourite Flagstaff restaurant and then we will go back to my house, and behind it, in the 
desert, we will start a fire of our own and barbecue a great many papers and tapes and 
films. I will even show you my shoe collection, if you like.'
    Cap thought it over. Rainbird gave him time, sitting calmly.
    At last Cap said, 'Hockstetter and his colleagues suggest it may take two years to open 
the girl up completely. It depends on how deeply her protective inhibitions go.'
    'And you will be gone in four to six months.'
    Cap shrugged.    Rainbird touched the side of his nose with one index finger and cocked his head  — a 
grotesque fairytale gesture. 'I think we can keep you in the saddle much longer than that, 
Cap. Between the two of  us, we know where hundreds of bodies are buried  — literally as 
well as figuratively. And I doubt if it will take years. We'll both get what we want, in the 
end. What do you say?'
    Cap thought about it. He felt old and tired and at a complete loss. 'I guess,' he said, 'that 
you have made yourself a deal.'
    'Fine,' Rainbird said briskly. 'I will be the girl's orderly, I think. No one at all in the
established scheme of things. That will be important to her. And of course she will never 
know I was the one who fired the rifle. That would be dangerous knowledge, wouldn't it? 
Very dangerous.'
    'Why?' Cap said finally. 'Why have you gone to these insane lengths?'
    'Do they seem insane?' Rainbird asked lightly. He got up and took one of the pictures 
from Cap's desk. It was the photo of Charlie sliding down the slope of crusted snow on
her flattened cardboard box, laughing. 'We all put our nuts and forage by for winter in
this business, Cap. Hoover did it. So did CIA directors beyond counting. So have you, or 
you would be drawing a pension right now. When I began, Charlene McGee wasn't even 
born, and I was only covering my own ass.'
    'But why the girl?'
    Rainbird didn't answer for a long time. He was looking at the photograph carefully,
almost tenderly. He touched it.
    'She is very beautiful,' he said. 'And very young. Yet inside her is your Z factor. The 
power of the gods. She and I will be close.' His eye grew dreamy. 'Yes, we will be very 
close.'In the Box
1
On March 27, Andy McGee decided abruptly that they could stay in Tashmore no longer. 
It had been more than two weeks since he had mailed his letters, and if anything was
going to come of them, it already would have. The very fact of the continuing silence
around Granther's camp made him uneasy. He supposed he could simply have been
dismissed out of hand as a crackpot in every case, but . . . he didn't believe it.
    What he believed, what his deepest intuition whispered, was that his letters had been
somehow diverted.
    And that would mean they knew where he and Charlie were.
    'We're going,' he told Charlie. 'Let's get our stuff together.'
    She only looked at him with her careful eyes, a little scared, and said nothing. She
didn't ask him where they were going or what they were going to do, and that made him 
nervous, too. In one of the closets he had found two old suitcases, plastered with an
acient vacation decals  — Grand Rapids, Niagara Falls, Miami Beach and the two of them 
began to sort what they would take and what they would leave.
    Blinding bright sunlight streamed in through the windows on the east side of the
cottage. Water dripped and gurgled in the downspouts. The night before, he had got little 
sleep; the ice had gone out and he had lain awake listening to it  — the high, ethereal, and 
somehow uncanny sound of the old yellow ice splitting and moving slowly down toward 
the neck of the pond, where the Great Hancock River spilled eastward across New
Hampshire and all of Maine, growing progressively more smelly and polluted  until it
vomited, noisome and dead, into the Atlantic. The sound was like a prolonged crystal
note or perhaps that of a bow drawn endlessly across a high violin string — a constant, 
fluted zzziiiiiinnnggg that settled over the nerve endings and seemed to make them
vibrate in sympathy. He had never been here at ice-out before and was not sure he would 
ever want to be again. There was something terrible and otherworldly about that sound as 
it vibrated between the silent evergreen walls of this low and eroded bowl of hills.
    He felt that they were very near again, like the barely seen monster in a recurring
nightmare. The day after Charlie's birthday, he had been on one of his tramps, the crosscountry skis buckled uncomfortably onto his feet, and he had come across a line of
snowshoe tracks leading up to a tall spruce tree. There were indents in the crust like
periods where the snowshoes had been taken off and jammed into the snow on their tails. 
There was a flurried confusion where the wearer had later refastened his snowshoes
('slushboats,' Granther had always called them, holding them in contempt for some
obscure reason of his own). At the base of the tree, Andy had found six Vantage cigarette 
butts and a crumpled yellow package that had once contained Kodak Tri-X film. More 
uneasy than ever, he had taken off the skis and climbed up into the tree. Halfway up he 
had found himself on a direct line of sight with Granther's cottage a mile away. It was
small and apparently empty. But with a telephoto lens . . .
   He hadn't mentioned his find to Charlie.
    The suitcases were packed. Her continued silence forced him into nervous speech, as if 
by not talking she was accusing him.    'We're going to hitch a ride into Berlin,' he said, 'and then we'll get a Greyhound back 
to New York City. We're going to the offices of the New York Times — '
    'But, Daddy, you sent them a letter.'
    'Honey, they might not have gotten it.'
    She looked at him in silence for a moment and then said, 'Do you think they took it?'
    'Of course n — ' He shook his head and started again. 'Charlie, I just don't know.'
    Charlie didn't reply. She knelt, closed one of the suitcases, and began fumbling
ineffectually with the clasps.
    'Let me help you, hon.'
    'I can do it!' She screamed at him, and then began to cry.
    'Charlie, don't,' he said. 'Please, hon. It's almost over.'
    'No, it's not,' she said, crying harder. 'It's never going to be over.'
2
There were an even dozen agents round Granther McGee's cabin. They had taken up their 
postions the night before. They all wore mottled white and green clothing. None of them
had been at the Manders farm, and none of them was armed except for John Rainbird, 
who had the rifle, and Don Jules, who carried a .22 pistol.
    'I am taking no chances of having someone panic because of what happened back in
New York,' Rainbird had told Cap. 'That Jamieson still looks as if his balls are hanging
around his knees.
    Similarly, he would not hear of the agents going armed. Things had a way of
happening, and he didn't want to come out of the operation with two corpses. He had
handpicked all of the agents, and the one he had chosen to take Andy McGee was Don
Jules. Jules was small, thirtyish, silent, morose. He was good at his job. Rainbird  knew, 
because Jules was the only man he had chosen to work with more than once. He was 
quick and practical. He did not get in the way at critical moments.
    'McGee will be out at some point during the day,' Rainbird had told him at the briefing. 
'The girl usually comes out, but McGee always does. If the man comes out alone, I'll take 
him and Jules will get him out of sight quickly and quietly. If the girl should come out
alone, same thing. If they come out together, I'll take the girl and Jules will take  McGee. 
The rest of you are just spear carriers  — do you understand that?' Rainbird's eye glared 
over them. 'You're there in case something goes drastically wrong, and that is all. Of
course, if something does go drastically wrong, most of you will be running for the lake 
with your pants on fire. You're along in case that one chance in a hundred turns up where 
you can do something. Of course, it's understood that you're also along as observers and 
witnesses in case I fuck up.'
    This had earned a thin and nervous chuckle.
    Rainbird raised one finger. 'If any one of you miscues and puts their wind up
somehow, I'll personally see that you end up in the lousiest jungle valley of South
America I can find — with a cored asshole. Believe that, gentlemen. You  are spear
carriers in my show. Remember it.'
    Later, at their 'staging area'  — an abandoned motel in St. Johnsbury — Rainbird had 
taken Don Jules aside.    'You have read the file on this man,' Rainbird said.
    Jules was smoking a Camel. 'Yeah.'
    'You understand the concept of mental domination?'
    'Yeah.'
    'You understand what happened to the two men in Ohio? The men that tried to take his 
daughter away?'
    'I worked with George Waring,' Jules said evenly. 'That guy could burn water making 
tea.'
    'In this man's outfit, that it not so unusual. I only need us to be clear. You'll need to be 
very quick.'
    'Yeah, okay.'
    'He's had a whole winter to rest, this guy. If he gets time to give you a shot, you're a 
good candidate to spend the next three years of your life in a padded room, thinking
you're a bird or a turnip or something.'
    'All right.'
    'All right what?'
    'I'll be quick. Give it a rest, John.'
    'There's a good chance that they will come out together,' Rainbird said,  ignoring him. 
'You'll be around the corner of the porch, out of sight of the door where they'll come out. 
You wait for me to take the girl. Her father will go to her. You'll be behind him. Get him 
in the neck.'
    'Sure.'
    'Don't screw this up, Don.'
    Jules smiled briefly and smoked. 'No,' he said.
3
The suitcases were packed. Charlie had put on her coat and her snowpants. Andy
shrugged into his own jacket, zipped it, and picked up the suitcases. He didn't feel good, 
not at all good. He had the jumps. One of his hunches.
    'You feel it, too, don't you?' Charlie asked. Her small face was pale and expressionless.
    Andy nodded reluctantly.
    'What do we do?'
    'We hope the feeling's a little early,' he said, although in his heart he didn't think it was 
so. 'What else can we do?'
    'What else can we do?' she echoed.
    She came to him then and lifted her arms to be picked up, something he could not
remember her doing for a long time  — maybe two years. It was amazing how time got 
by, how quickly a child could change, change in front of your eyes with an
unobtrusiveness that was nearly terrible.
    He put the suitcases down and picked her up and hugged her. She kissed his cheek and 
then hugged him again, very tightly.
    'Are you ready?' he asked, setting her down.
    'I guess so,' Charlie said. She was close to tears again. 'Daddy . . . I won't make fires. 
Not even if they come before we can get away.'    'Yes,' he said. 'That's all right, Charlie. I understand that.'
    'I love you, Dad.'
    He nodded. 'I love you too, kiddo.'
    Andy went to the door and opened it. For a moment the sunlight was so bright that he 
could see nothing at all. Then his pupils contracted and the day cleared before him, bright 
with melting snow. To his right was Tashmore Pond, dazzling, jaggedly irregular patches 
of blue water showing between the floating chunks of ice. Straight ahead were pine
woods. Through them he could barely see the green shingled roof of the next camp, free 
of snow at last.
    The woods were still, and Andy's feeling of disquiet intensified. Where was the
birdsong that had greeted their mornings ever since the winter temperatures had begun to 
moderate? There was none today . . . only the drip of snow melting from the branches. He 
found himself wishing desperately that Granther had put in a phone out here. He had to 
restrain an urge to shout  Who's there? at the top of his lungs. But that would only frighten 
Charlie more.
    'Looks fine,' he said. 'I think we're still ahead of them . . . if they're coming at all.'
    'That's good,' she said colorlessly.
    'Let's hit the road, kid,' Andy said, and thought for the hundredth time,  What else is 
there to do? and thought again how much he hated them.
    Charlie came across the room to him, past  the drainer full of dishes they had washed 
that morning after breakfast. The entire cottage was the way they had found it, spick-andspan. Granther would have been pleased.
    Andy slipped an arm around Charlie's shoulders and gave her one more brief hug.
Then he picked up the suitcases and they stepped out into the early spring sunshine
together.
4
John Rainbird was halfway up a tall spruce one hundred and fifty yards away. He was
wearing lineman's spikes on his feet and a lineman's belt held him firmly against the
trunk of the tree. When the cabin door opened, he threw the rifle to his shoulder and
seated it firmly. Total calm fell over him in a reassuring cloak. Everything became
startlingly clear in front of his one good eye. When he lost his other eye, he had suffered 
a blurring of his depth of perception, but at moments of extreme concentration, like this 
one, his old, clear seeing came back to him; it was as if the ruined eye could regenerate 
itself for brief periods.
    It was not a long shot, and he would not have wasted a moment's worry if it had been a 
bullet he was planning to put through the girl's neck — but he was dealing with
something far more clumsy, something that jumped the risk element by a factor of ten.
Fixed inside the barrel of this specially modified rifle was a dart tipped with an ampul of
Orasin, and at this distance there was always a chance it might tumble or veer. Luckily, 
the day was almost without wind.
    If it is the will of the Great Spirit and of my ancestors, Rainbird prayed silently, guide 
my hands and my eye that the shot may be true.
    The girl came out with her father by her side Jules was in it, then. Through thetelescopic sight the girl looked as big as a barn door. The parka was a bright blue blaze 
against the weathered boards of the cabin. Rainbird had a moment to note the suitcases in 
McGee's hands, to realize they were just in time after all.
    The girl's hood was down, the tab of her zipper pulled up only to her breastbone, so 
that the coat spread open  slightly at the throat. The day was warm, and that was in his 
favor, too.
    He tightened down on the trigger and sighted the crosshairs on the base of her throat.
    If it is the will —
    He squeezed the trigger. There was no explosion, only a hollow  phut! and a small curl 
of smoke from the rifle's breech.
5
They were on the edge of the steps when Charlie suddenly stopped and made a strangled 
swallowing noise. Andy dropped the suitcases immediately. He had heard nothing, but
something was terribly wrong. Something about Charlie had changed.
    'Charlie? Charlie?'
    He stared at her. She stood as still as a statue, incredibly beautiful against the bright
snowfield. Incredibly small. And suddenly he realized what the change was. It was so
fundamental, so awful, that he had not been able to grasp it at first.    What appeared to be a long needle was sticking out of Charlie's throat just below the 
Adam's apple. Her mittened hand groped for it, found it, twisted it to a new and
grotesque, upward-jutting angle. A thin trickle of blood began to flow from the wound
and down the side of her throat. A flower of blood, small and delicate, stained the collar 
of her shirt and just touched the edging of fake fur that bordered the zipper of her parka.
    'Charlie!' he screamed. He leaped forward and grabbed her arm just as her eyes rolled 
up and she pitched outward. He let her down to the porch, crying her name over and over. 
The dart in her throat twinkled brightly in the sun. Her body had the loose, boneless feel 
of a dead thing. He held her, cradled her, and looked out at the sunshiny woods that
seemed so empty — and where no birds sang.
    'Who did it?' he screamed. 'Who did it? Come out where 1 can see you!'
    Don Jules stepped around the corner of the porch. He was wearing Adidas tennis
sneakers. He held the .22 in one hand.
    'Who shot my daughter?' Andy screamed. Something in his throat vibrated painfully
with the force of his scream. He held her to him, so terribly loose and boneless inside her 
warm  blue parka. His fingers went to the dart and pulled it out, starting a fresh trickle of 
blood.
    Get her inside, he thought. Got to get her inside.
    Jules approached him and shot him in the back of the neck, much as the actor Booth 
had once shot a President. For a moment Andy jerked upward on his knees, holding
Charlie even more tightly against him. Then he collapsed forward over her.
    Jules looked at him closely, then waved the men out of the woods.
    'Nothing to it,' he said to himself as Rainbird came toward the cabin, wading through
the sticky, melting snow of late March. 'Nothing to it. What was all the fuss about?'The Blackout
1
The chain of events that ended in such destruction and loss of life began with a summer 
storm and the failure of two generators.
    The storm came on August 19, almost five months after Andy and Charlie were taken 
at Granther's camp in Vermont. For ten days the weather had been sticky and still. That 
August day, the thunderheads began to pile up shortly after noon, but nobody who
worked on the grounds of the two handsome antebellum homes which faced each other 
across the rolling expanse of green lawn and manicured flowerbeds believed that the
thunderheads were telling the truth — not the groundsmen astride their Lawnboys, not
the woman who was in charge of computer subsections  A-E (as well as the computerroom coffee-maker), who took one of the horses and cantered it lovingly along the wellkept bridle paths during her lunch hour, certainly not Cap, who ate a hero sandwich in his 
air-conditioned office and went right on working on next year's budget, oblivious of the
heat and humidity outside.
    Perhaps the only person in the Shop compound at Longmont that day who thought it 
really would rain was the man who had been named for the rain. The big Indian drove in 
at twelve-thirty, prefatory to clocking in at one. His bones, and the shredded hollow
where his left eye had been, ached when rain was on the way.
    He was driving a very old and rusty Thunderbird with a D parking sticker on the
windshield. He was dressed in orderly's whites. Before he got out of the car, he put on an 
embroidered eyepatch. He wore it when he was on the job, because of the girl, but only
then. It bothered him. It was only the patch that made him think about the lost eye.
    There were four parking lots inside the Shop enclave. Rainbird's personal car, a new
yellow Cadillac that ran on diesel fuel, bore an A sticker. A was the VIP parking lot,
located beneath the southernmost of the two plantation houses: An underground tunneland-elevator system connected the VIP lot directly with the computer room, the situation
rooms, the extensive Shop library and newsrooms, and, of course, the Visitors' Quarters 
— a nondescript name for the complex of laboratories and nearby apartments where
Charlie McGee and her father were being kept.
    The B lot was for second-echelon employees; it was farther away. C parking lot was 
for secretaries, mechanics, electricians, and the like; it was farther away still. D lot was 
for unskilled employees  — spear carriers, in Rainbird's own terms. It was almost half a 
mile from anything, and always filled with a sad and motley collection of Detroit rolling
iron only a step and a half away from the weekly demo derby at Jackson Plains, the 
nearby stock-car track.
    The bureaucratic pecking order, Rainbird thought, locking his wreck of a  T-bird and 
tilting his head up to look at the thunderheads. The storm was coming. It would arrive
around four o'clock, he reckoned.
    He began to walk toward the small Quonset but set tastefully back in a grove of
sugarpines where low-level employees, Class Vs and VIs, punched in. His whites flapped 
around him. A gardener putted by him on one of the Groundskeeping Department's dozen 
or so riding lawnmowers. A gaily colored sun parasol floated above the seat. Thegardener took no notice of Rainbird; that was also part of the bureaucratic pecking order. 
If you were a Class IV, a Class V became invisible. Not even Rainbird's half-destroyed 
face caused much comment; like every other government agency, the Shop hired enough
vets to look good. Max Factor had little to teach the U.S. government about good
cosmetics. And it went without saying that a vet with some visible disability — a
prosthetic arm, a  motorized wheelchair, a scrambled face — was worth any three vets 
who looked 'normal.' Rainbird knew men who had had their minds and spirits mauled as 
badly as his own face had been in the Vietnam traveling house party, men who would
have been happy to find a job clerking in a Piggly Wiggly. But they just didn't look right. 
Not that Rainbird had any sympathy for them. In fact, he found the whole thing rather
funny.
    Nor was he recognized by any of the people he now worked with as a former Shop 
agent and  hatchet man; he would have sworn to that. Until seventeen weeks ago, he had 
been only a shadow shape behind his yellow Cadillac's polarized windshield, just
someone else with an A clearance.
    'Don't you think you're going overboard with this a bit?' Cap  had asked. 'The girl has 
no connection with the gardeners or the steno pool. You're only onstage with her.'
    Rainbird shook his head. 'All it would take is a single slip. One person to mention, just 
casually, that the friendly orderly with the messed-up face parks his car in the VIP lot and 
changes to his whites in the executive washroom. 