The Green Mile
Part One:
The Two Dead Girls
1.
This happened in 1932, when the state penitentiary was still at Cold Mountain. And the electric chair was
there, too, of course.
The inmates made jokes about the chair, the way people always make jokes about things that frightenthem but can't be gotten away from. They called it Old Sparky, or the Big Juicy. They made cracks about
the power bill, and how Warden Moores would cook his Thanksgiving dinner that fall, with his wife,
Melinda, too sick to cook.
But for the ones who actually had to sit down in that chair, the humor went out of the situation in a hurry.
I presided over seventy-eight executions during my time at Cold Mountain (that's one figure I've never
been confused about; I'll remember it on my deathbed), and I think that, for most of those men, the truth
of what was happening to them finally hit all the way home when their ankles were being clamped to the
stout oak of "Old Sparky's" legs. The realization came then (you would see it rising in their eyes, a kind
of cold dismay) that their own legs had finished their careers. The blood still ran in them, the muscles
were still strong, but they were finished, all the same; they were never going to walk another country
mile or dance with a girl at a barn-raising. Old Sparky's clients came to a knowledge of their deaths from
the ankles up. There was a black silk bag that went over their heads after they had finished their rambling
and mostly disjointed last remarks. It was supposed to be for them, but I always thought: it was really for
us, to keep us from seeing the awful tide of dismay in their eyes as they realized they were going to die
with their knees bent.
There was no death row at Cold Mountain, only E Block, set apart from the other four and about a
quarter their size, brick instead of wood, with a horrible bare metal roof that glared in the summer sun
like a delirious eyeball. Six cells inside, three on each side of a wide center aisle, each almost twice as
big as the cells in the other four blocks. Singles, too. Great accommodations for a prison (especially in
the thirties), but the inmates would have traded for cells in any of the other four. Believe me, they would
have traded.
There was never a time during my years as block superintendent when all six cells were occupied at one
time-thank God for small favors. Four was the most, mixed black and white (at Cold Mountain, there was
no segregation among the walking dead), and that was a little piece of hell. One was a woman, Beverly
McCall. She was black as the ace of spades and as beautiful as the sin you never had nerve enough to
commit. She put up with six years of her husband beating her, but wouldn't put up with his creeping
around for a single day. On the evening after she found out he was cheating, she stood waiting for the
unfortunate Lester McCall, known to his pals (and, presumably, to his extremely short-term mistress) as
Cutter, at the top of the stairs leading to the apartment over his barber shop. She waited until he got his
overcoat half off, then dropped his cheating guts onto his two-tone shoes. Used one of Cutter's own
razors to do it. Two nights before she was due to sit in Old Sparky, she called me to her cell and said she
had been visited by her African spirit-father in a dream. He told her to discard her slave-name and to die
under her free name, Matuomi. That was her request, that her death warrant should be read under the
name of Beverly Matuomi. I guess her spirit-father didn't give her any first name, or one she could make
out, anyhow. I said yes, okay, fine. One thing those years serving as the bull-goose screw taught me was
never to refuse the condemned unless I absolutely had to. In the case of Beverly Matuomi, it made no
difference anyway. The governor called the next day around three in the afternoon, commuting her
sentence to life in the Grassy Valley Penal Facility for Women-all penal and no penis, we used to say
back then. I was glad to see Bev's round ass going left instead of right when she got to the duty desk, let
me tell you.
Thirty-five years or so later - had to be at least thirty-five - I saw that name on the obituary page of the
paper, under a picture of a skinny-faced black lady with a cloud of white hair and glasses with
rhinestones at the corners. It was Beverly. She'd spent the last ten years of her life a free woman, theobituary said, and had rescued the small-town library of Raines Falls pretty much single-handed. She had
also taught Sunday school and had been much loved in that little backwater. LIBRARIAN DIES OF
HEART FAILURE, the headline said, and below that, in smaller type, almost as an afterthought: Served
Over Two Decades in Prison for Murder. Only the eyes, wide and blazing behind the glasses with the
rhinestones at the corners, were the same. They were the eyes of a woman who even at seventy-whatever
would not hesitate to pluck a safety razor from its blue jar of disinfectant, if the urge seemed pressing.
You know murderers, even if they finish up as old lady librarians in dozey little towns. At least you do if
you've spent as much time minding murderers as I did. There was only one time I ever had a question
about the nature of my job. That, I reckon, is why I'm writing this.
The wide corridor up the center of E Block was floored with linoleum the color of tired old limes, and so
what was called the Last Mile at other prisons was called the Green Mile at Cold Mountain. It ran, I
guess, sixty long paces from south to north, bottom to top. At the bottom was the restraint room. At the
top end was a T-junction. A left turn meant life-if you called what went on in the sunbaked exercise yard
life, and many did; many lived it for years, with no apparent ill effects. Thieves and arsonists and sex
criminals, all talking their talk and walking their walk and making their little deals.
A right turn, though - that was different. First you went into my office (where the carpet was also green,
a thing I kept meaning to change and not getting around to), and crossed in front of my desk, which was
flanked by the American flag on the left and the state flag on the right. On the far side were two doors.
One led into the small W.C. that I and the Block E guards (sometimes even Warden Moores) used; the
other opened on a kind of storage shed. This was where you ended up when you walked the Green Mile.
It was a small door - I had to duck my head when I went through, and John Coffey actually had to sit and
scoot. You came out on a little landing, then went down three cement steps to a board floor. It was a
miserable room without heat and with a metal roof, just like the one on the block to which it was an
adjunct. It was cold enough in there to see your breath during the winter, and stifling in the summer. At
the execution of Elmer Manfred - in July or August of '30, that one was, I believe-we had nine witnesses
pass out.
On the left side of the storage shed - again - there was life. Tools (all locked down in frames
criss-crossed with chains, as if they were carbine rifles instead of spades and pickaxes), dry goods, sacks
of seeds for spring planting in the prison gardens, boxes of toilet paper, pallets cross-loaded with blanks
for the prison plate-shop... even bags of lime for marking out the baseball diamond and the football
gridiron - the cons played in what was known as The Pasture, and fall afternoons were greatly looked
forward to at Cold Mountain.
On the right - once again - death. Old Sparky his ownself, sitting up on a plank platform at the southeast
corner of the store room, stout oak legs, broad oak arms that had absorbed the terrorized sweat of scores
of men in the last few minutes of their lives, and the metal cap, usually hung jauntily on the back of the
chair, like some robot kid's beanie in a Buck Rogers comic-strip. A cord ran from it and through a
gasket-circled hole in the cinderblock wall behind the chair. Off to one side was a galvanized tin bucket.
If you looked inside it, you would see a circle of sponge, cut just right to fit the metal cap. Before
executions, it was soaked in brine to better conduct the charge of direct-current electricity that ran
through the wire, through the sponge, and into the condemned man's brain.
2.1932 was the year of John Coffey. The details would be in the papers, still there for anyone who cared
enough to look them out - someone with more energy than one very old man whittling away the end of
his life in a Georgia nursing home. That was
a hot fall, I remember that; very hot, indeed. October almost like August, and the warden's wife, Melinda,
up in the hospital at Indianola for a spell. It was the fall I had the worst urinary infection of my life, not
bad enough to put me in the hospital myself, but almost bad enough for me to wish I was dead every time
I took a leak. It was the fall of Delacroix, the little half-bald Frenchman with the mouse, the one that
came in the summer and did that cute trick with the spool. Mostly, though, it was the fall that John
Coffey came to E Block, sentenced to death for the rape-murder of the Detterick twins.
There were four or five guards on the block each shift, but a lot of them were floaters. Dean Stanton,
Harry Terwilliger, and Brutus Howell (the men called him "Brutal," but it was a joke, he wouldn't hurt a
fly unless he had to, in spite of his size) are all dead now, and so is Percy Wetmore, who really was
brutal ... not to mention stupid. Percy had no business on E Block, where an ugly nature was useless and
sometimes dangerous, but he was related to the governor by marriage, and so he stayed.
It was Percy Wetmore who ushered Coffey onto the block, with the supposedly traditional cry of "Dead
man walking! Dead man walking here!"
It was still as hot as the hinges of hell, October or not. The door to the exercise yard opened, letting in a
flood of brilliant light and the biggest man I've ever seen, except for some of the basketball fellows they
have on the TV down in the "Resource Room" of this home for wayward droolers I've finished up in. He
wore chains on his arms and across his water-barrel of a chest; he wore legirons on his ankles and
shuffled a chain between them that sounded like cascading coins as it ran along the lime - colored
corridor between the cells. Percy Wetmore was on one side of him, skinny little Harry Terwilliger was on
the other, and they looked like children walking along with a captured bear. Even Brutus Howell looked
like a kid next to Coffey, and Brutal was over six feet tall and broad as well, a football tackle who had
gone on to play at LSU until he flunked out and came back home to the ridges.
John Coffey was black, like most of the men who came to stay for awhile in E Block before dying in Old
Sparky's lap, and he stood six feet, eight inches tall. He wasn't all willowy like the TV basketball fellows,
though - he was broad in the shoulders and deep through the chest, laced over with muscle in every
direction. They'd put him in the biggest denims they could find in Stores, and still the cuffs of the pants
rode halfway up on his bunched and scarred calves. The shirt was open to below his chest, and the
sleeves stopped somewhere on his forearms. He was holding his cap in one huge hand, which was just as
well; perched on his bald mahogany ball of a head, it would have looked like the kind of cap an
organgrinder's monkey wears, only blue instead of red. He looked like he could have snapped the chains
that held him as easily as you might snap the ribbons on a Christmas present, but when you looked in his
face, you knew he wasn't going to do anything like that. It wasn't dull-although that was what Percy
thought, it wasn't long before Percy was calling him the ijit - but lost. He kept looking around as if to
make out where he was. Maybe even who he was. My first thought was that he looked like a black
Samson ... only after Delilah had shaved him smooth as her faithless little hand and taken all the fun out
of him.
"Dead man walking!" Percy trumpeted, hauling on that bear of a man's wristcuff, as if he really believed
he could move him if Coffey decided he didn't want to move anymore on his own. Harry didn't say
anything, but he looked embarrassed. "Dead man---!''That'll be enough of that," I said. I was in what was going to be Coffey's cell, sitting on his bunk. I'd
known he was coming, of course, was there to welcome him and take charge of him, but had no idea of
the man's pure size until I saw him. Percy gave me a look that said we all knew I was an asshole (except
for the big dummy, of course, who only knew how to rape and murder little girls), but he didn't say
anything.
The three of them stopped outside the cell door, which was standing open on its track. I nodded to Harry,
who said: "Are you sure you want to be in there with him, boss?" I didn't often hear Harry Terwilliger
sound nervous - he'd been right there by my side during the riots of six or seven years before and had
never wavered, even when the rumors that some of them had guns began to circulate - but he sounded
nervous then.
"Am I going to have any trouble with you, big boy?" I asked, sitting there on the bunk and trying not to
look or sound as miserable as I felt-that urinary infection I mentioned earlier wasn't as bad as it
eventually got, but it was no day at the beach, let me tell you.
Coffey shook his head slowly - once to the left, once to the right, then back to dead center. Once his eyes
found me, they never left me.
Harry had a clipboard with Coffey's forms on it in one hand. "Give it to him," I said to Harry "Put it in
his hand."
Harry did. The big mutt took it like a sleepwalker.
"Now bring it to me, big boy," I said, and Coffey did, his chains jingling and rattling. He had to duck his
head just to enter the cell.
I looked up and down mostly to register his height as a fact and not an optical illusion. It was real: six
feet, eight inches. His weight was given as two-eighty, but I think that was only an estimate; he had to
have been three hundred and twenty, maybe as much as three hundred and fifty pounds. Under the space
for scars and identifying marks, one word had been blocked out in the laborious printing of Magnusson,
the old trusty in Registration: Numerous.
I looked up. Coffey had shuffled a bit to one side and I could see Harry standing across the corridor in
front of Delacroix's cell - he was our only other prisoner in E Block when Coffey came in. Del was a
slight, balding man with the worried face of an accountant who knows his embezzlement will soon be
discovered. His tame mouse was sitting on his shoulder.
Percy Wetmore was leaning in the doorway of the cell which had just become John Coffey's. He had
taken his hickory baton out of the custom-made holster he carried it in, and was tapping it against one
palm the way a man does when he has a toy he wants to use. And all at once I couldn't stand to have him
there. Maybe it was the unseasonable heat, maybe it was the urinary infection heating up my groin and
making the itch of my flannel underwear all but unbearable, maybe it was knowing that the state had sent
me a black man next door to an idiot to execute, and Percy clearly wanted to hand-tool him a little first.
Probably it was all those things. Whatever it was, I stopped caring about his political connections for a
little while.
"Percy." I said. "They're moving house over in the infirmary.""Bill Dodge is in charge of that detail-"
"I know he is," I said. "Go and help him."
'That isn't my job," Percy said. "This big lugoon is my job." "Lugoon" was Percy's joke name for the big
ones - a combination of lug and goon. He resented the big ones. He wasn't skinny, like Harry Terwilliger,
but he was short. A banty-rooster sort of guy, the kind that likes to pick fights, especially when the odds
are all their way. And vain about his hair. Could hardly keep his hands off it.
"Then your job is done," I said. "Get over to the infirmary."
His lower lip pooched out. Bill Dodge and his men were moving boxes and stacks of sheets, even the
beds; the whole infirmary was going to a new frame building over on the west side of the prison. Hot
work, heavy lifting. Percy Wetmore wanted no part of either.
"They got all the men they need," he said.
"Then get over there and straw-boss," I said, raising my voice. I saw Harry wince and paid no attention.
If the governor ordered Warden Moores to fire me for ruffling the wrong set of feathers, who was Hal
Moores going to put in my place? Percy? It was a joke. "I really don't care what you do, Percy, as long as
you get out of here for awhile!'
For a moment I thought he was going to stick and there'd be real trouble, with Coffey standing there the
whole time like the world's biggest stopped clock. Then Percy rammed his billy back into its hand-tooled
holster-foolish damned vanitorious thing - and went stalking up the corridor. I don't remember which
guard was sitting at the duty desk that day-one of the floaters, I guess - but Percy must not have liked the
way he looked, because he growled, "You wipe that smirk off your shitepoke face or I'll wipe it off for
you" as he went by. There was a rattle of keys, a momentary blast of hot sunlight from the exercise yard,
and then Percy Wetmore was gone, at least for the time being. Delacroix's mouse ran back and forth from
one of the little Frenchman's shoulders to the other, his filament whiskers twitching.
"Be still, Mr. Jingles," Delacroix said, and the mouse stopped on his left shoulder just as if he had
understood. "Just be so still and so quiet." In Delacroix's lilting Cajun accent, quiet came out sounding
exotic and foreign - kwaht.
"You go lie down, Del," I said curtly. "Take you a rest. This is none of your business, either!'
He did as I said. He had raped a young girl and killed her, and had then dropped her body behind the
apartment house where she lived, doused it with coal-oil, and then set it on fire, hoping in some muddled
way to dispose of the evidence of his crime. The fire had spread to the building itself, had engulfed it,
and six more people had died, two of them children. It was the only crime he had in him, and now he was
just a mild-mannered man with a worried face, a bald pate, and long hair straggling over the back of his
shirt-collar. He would sit down with Old Sparky in a little while, and Old Sparky would make an end to
him ... but whatever it was that had done that awful thing was already gone, and now he lay on his bunk,
letting his little companion run squeaking over his hands. In a way, that was the worst; Old Sparky never
burned what was inside them, and the drugs they inject them with today don't put it to sleep. It vacates,
jumps to someone else, and leaves us to kill husks that aren't really alive anyway.
I turned my attention to the giant."If I let Harry take those chains off you, are you going to be nice?"
He nodded. It was like his head-shake: down , up, back to center. His strange eyes looked at me. There
was a kind of peace in them, but not a kind I was sure I could trust. I crooked a finger to Harry, who
came in and unlocked the chains. He showed no fear now, even when he knelt between Coffey's
treetrunk legs to unlock the ankle irons, and that eased me some. It was Percy who had made Harry
nervous, and I trusted Harry's instincts. I trusted the instincts of all my day-to-day E Block men, except
for Percy.
I have a little set speech I make to men new on the block, but I hesitated with Coffey, because he seemed
so abnormal, and not just in his size.
When Harry stood back (Coffey had remained motionless during the entire unlocking ceremony, as
placid as a Percheron), I looked up at my new charge, tapping on the clipboard with my thumb, and said:
"Can you talk, big boy?"
"Yes, sir, boss, I can talk," he said. His voice was a deep and quiet rumble. It made me think of a freshly
tuned tractor engine. He had no real Southern drawl-he said I, not Ah-but there was a kind of Southern
construction to his speech that I noticed later. As if he was from the South, but not of it. He didn't sound
illiterate, but he didn't sound educated. In his speech as in so many other things, he was a mystery.
Mostly it was his eyes that troubled me - a kind of peaceful absence in them, as if he were floating far,
far away.
"Your name is John Coffey."
"Yes, sir, boss, like the drink only not spelled the same way."
"So you can spell, can you? Read and write?"
"Just my name, boss," said he, serenely.
I sighed, then gave him a short version of my set speech. I'd already decided he wasn't going to be any
trouble. In that I was both right and wrong.
"My name is Paul Edgecombe," I said. "I'm the E Block super - the head screw. You want something
from me, ask for me by name. If I'm not here, ask this other, man - his name is Harry Terwilliger. Or you
ask for Mr. Stanton or Mr. Howell. Do you understand that?"
Coffey nodded.
"Just don't expect to get what you want unless we decide it's what you need - this isn't a hotel. Still with
me?"
He nodded again.
"This is a quiet place, big boy - not like the rest of the prison. It's just you and Delacroix over there. You
won't work; mostly you'll just sit. Give you a chance to think things over." Too much time for most of
them, but I didn't say that. "Sometimes we play the radio, if all's in order. You like the radio?"
He nodded, but doubtfully, as if he wasn't sure what the radio was. I later found out that was true, in a
way; Coffey knew things when he encountered them again, but in between he forgot. He knew thecharacters on Our Gal Sunday, but had only the haziest memory of what they'd been up to the last time.
"If you behave, you'll eat on time, you'll never see the solitary cell down at the far end, or have to wear
one of those canvas coats that buttons up the back. You'll have two hours in the yard afternoons from
four until six, except on Saturdays when the rest of the prison population has their flag football games.
You'll have your visitors on Sunday afternoons, if you have someone who wants to visit you. Do you,
Coffey?"
He shook his head. "Got none, boss," he said.
'Well, your lawyer, then!'
"I believe I've seen the back end of him," he said. "He was give to me on loan. Don't believe he could
find his way up here in the mountains!'
I looked at him closely to see if he might be trying a little joke, but he didn't seem to be. And I really
hadn't expected any different. Appeals weren't for the likes of John Coffey, not back then; they had their
day in court and then the world forgot them until they saw a squib in the paper saying a certain fellow
had taken a little electricity along about midnight. But a man with a wife, children, or friends to look
forward to on Sunday afternoons was easier to control, if control looked to be a problem. Here it didn't,
and that was good. Because he was so damned big.
I shifted a little on the bunk, then decided I might feel a little more comfortable in my nether parts if I
stood up, and so I did. He backed away from me respectfully, and clasped his hands in front of him.
"Your time here can be easy or hard, big boy, it all depends on you. I'm here to say you might as well
make it easy on all of us, because it comes to the same in the end. We'll treat you as right as you deserve.
Do you have any questions?"
"Do you leave a light on after bedtime?" he asked right away, as if he had only been waiting for the
chance.
I blinked at him. I had been asked a lot of strange questions by newcomers to E Block - once about the
size of my wife's tits-but never that one.
Coffey was smiling a trifle uneasily, as if he knew we would think him foolish but couldn't help himself.
"Because I get a little scared in the dark sometimes," he said. "If it's a strange place."
I looked at him - the pure size of him - and felt strangely touched. They did touch you, you know; you
didn't see them at their worst, hammering out their horrors like demons at a forge.
"Yes, it's pretty bright in here all night long," I said. "Half the lights along the Mile burn from nine until
five every morning." Then I realized he wouldn't have any idea of what I was talking about - he didn't
know the Green Mile from Mississippi mud - and so I pointed. "In the corridor."
He nodded, relieved. I'm not sure he knew what a corridor was, either, but he could see the 200-watt
bulbs in their wire cages.
I did something I'd never done to a prisoner before, then - I offered him my hand. Even now I don't know
why. Him asking about the lights, maybe. It made Harry Terwilliger blink, I can tell you that. Coffey
took my hand with surprising gentleness, my hand all but disappearing into his, and that was all of it. Ihad another moth in my killing bottle. We were done.
I stepped out of the cell. Harry pulled the door shut on its track and ran both locks. Coffey stood where
he was a moment or two longer, as if he didn't know what to do next, and then he sat down on his bunk,
clasped his giant's hands between his knees, and lowered his head like a man who grieves or prays. He
said something then in his strange, almost Southern voice. I heard it with perfect clarity, and although I
didn't know much about what he'd done then - you don't need to know about what a man's done in order
to feed him and groom him until it's time for him to pay off what he owes - it still gave me a chill.
"I couldn't help-it, boss," he said. "I tried to take it back, but it was too late!'
3.
"You're going to have you some trouble with Percy," Harry said as we walked back up the hall and into
my office. Dean Stanton, sort of my third in command - we didn't actually have such things, a situation
Percy Wetmore would have fixed up in a flash - was sitting behind my desk, updating the files, a job I
never seemed to get around to. He barely looked up as we came in, just gave his little glasses a shove
with the ball of his thumb and dived back into his paperwork.
"I been having trouble with that peckerwood since the day he came here," I said, gingerly, pulling my
pants away from my crotch and wincing. "Did you hear what he was shouting when he brought that big
galoot down?"
"Couldn't very well not," Harry said. "I was there, you know."
"I was in the john and heard it just fine," Dean said. He drew a sheet of paper to him, held it up into the
light so I could see there was a coffee-ring as well as typing on it, and then tossed it into the waste
basket. 'Dead man walking.' Must have read that in one of those magazines he likes so much!"
And he probably had. Percy Wetmore was a great reader of Argosy and Stag and Men's Adventure. There
was a prison tale in every issue, it seemed, and Percy read them avidly, like a man doing research. It was
like he was trying to find out how to act, and thought the information was in those magazines. He'd come
just after we did Anthony Ray, the hatchet-killer - and he hadn't actually participated in an execution yet,
although he'd witnessed one from the switch-room.
"He knows people," Harry said. "He's connected. You'll have to answer for sending him off the block,
and you'll have to answer even harder for expecting him to do some real work."
"I don't expect it," I said, and I didn't ... but I had hopes. Bill Dodge wasn't the sort to let a man just stand
around and do the heavy looking-on. "I'm more interested in the big boy, for the time being. Are we
going to have trouble with him?"
Harry shook his head with decision.
"He was quiet as a lamb at court down there in Trapingus County," Dean said. He took his little rimless
glasses off and began to polish them on his vest. "Of course they had more chains on him than Scrooge
saw on Marley's ghost, but he could have kicked up dickens if he'd wanted. That's a pun, son."
"I know," I said, although I didn't. I just hate letting Dean Stanton get the better of me.
"Big one, ain't he?" Dean said."He is," I agreed. "Monstrous big."
"Probably have to crank Old Sparky up to Super Bake to fry his ass!'
"Don't worry about Old Sparky," I said absently. "He makes the big 'uns little."
Dean pinched the sides of his nose, where there were a couple of angry red patches from his glasses, and
nodded. "Yep," he said. "Some truth to that, all right."
I asked, "Do either of you know where he came from before he showed up in ... Tefton? It was Tefton,
wasn't it?"
"Yep," Dean said. "Tefton, down in Trapingus County. Before he showed up there and did what he did,
no one seems to know. He just drifted around, I guess. You might be able to find out a little more from
the newspapers in the prison library, if you're really interested. They probably won't get around to
moving those until next week." He grinned. "You might have to listen to your little buddy bitching and
moaning upstairs, though."
"I might just go have a peek, anyway," I said, and later on that afternoon I did.
The prison library was in back of the building that was going to become the prison auto shop - at least
that was the plan. More pork in someone's pocket was what I thought, but the Depression was on, and I
kept my opinions to myself - the way I should have kept my mouth shut about Percy, but sometimes a
man just can't keep it clapped tight. A man's mouth gets him in more trouble than his pecker ever could,
most of the time. And the auto shop never happened, anyway - the next spring, the prison moved sixty
miles down the road to Brighton. More backroom deals, I reckon. More barrels of pork. Wasn't nothing
to me.
Administration had gone to a new building on the east side of the yard; the infirmary was being moved
(whose country-bumpkin idea it had been to put an infirmary on the second floor in the first place was
just another of life's mysteries); the library was still partly stocked - not that it ever had much in it - and
standing empty. The old building was a hot clapboard box kind of shouldered in between A and B
Blocks. Their bathrooms backed up on it and the whole building was always swimming with this vague
pissy smell, which was probably the only good reason for the move. The library was L-shaped, and not
much bigger than my office. I looked for a fan, but they were all gone. It must have been a hundred
degrees in there, and I could feel that hot throb in my groin when I sat down. Sort of like an infected
tooth. I know that's absurd, considering the region we're talking about here, but it's the only thing I could
compare it to. It got a lot worse during and just after taking a leak, which I had done just before walking
over.
There was one other fellow there after all - a scrawny old trusty named Gibbons dozing away in the
corner with a Wild West novel in his lap and his hat pulled down over his eyes. The heat wasn't
bothering him, nor were the grunts, thumps, and occasional curses from the infirmary upstairs (where it
had to be at least ten degrees hotter, and I hoped Percy Wetmore was enjoying it). I didn't bother him,
either, but went around to the short side of the L, where the newspapers were kept. I thought they might
be gone along with the fans, in spite of what Dean had said. They weren't, though, and the business about
the Detterick twins was easily enough looked out; it had been front-page news from the commission of
the crime in June right through the trial in late August and September.Soon I had forgotten the heat and the thumps from upstairs and old Gibbons's wheezy snores. The
thought of those little nine-year-old girls - their fluffy heads of blonde hair and their engaging Bobbsey
Twins smiles - in connection with Coffey's hulking darkness was unpleasant but impossible to ignore.
Given his size, it was easy to imagine him actually eating them, like a giant in a fairy tale. What he had
done was even worse, and it was a lucky thing for him that he hadn't just been lynched right there on the
riverbank. If, that was, you considered waiting to walk the Green Mile and sit in Old Sparky's lap lucky.
4.
King Cotton had been deposed in the South seventy years before all these things happened and would
never be king again, but in those years of the thirties it had a little revival. There were no more cotton
plantations, but there were forty or fifty prosperous cotton farms in the southern part of our state. Klaus
Detterick owned one of them. By the standards of the nineteen-fifties he would have been considered
only a rung above shirttail poor, but by those of the thirties he was considered well-to-do because he
actually paid his store bill in cash at the end of most months, and he could meet the bank president's eyes
if they happened to pass on the street. The farmhouse was clean and commodious. In addition to the
cotton, there were the other two c's: chickens and a few cows. He and his wife had three children:
Howard. who was twelve or thereabouts, and the twin girls. Cora and Kathe.
On a warm night in June of that year, the girls asked for and were given permission to sleep on the
screen-enclosed side porch, which ran the length of the house. This was a great treat for them. Their
mother kissed them goodnight just shy of nine, when the last light had gone out of the sky. It was the
final time she saw either of them until they were in their coffins and the undertaker had repaired the
worst of the damage.
Country families went to bed early in those days - "soon as 'twas dark under the table," my own mother
sometimes said - and slept soundly. Certainly Klaus, Marjorie, and Howie Detterick did on the night the
twins were taken. Klaus would almost certainly have been wakened by Bowser, the family's big old
half-breed collie, if he had barked, but Bowser didn't. Not that night, not ever again.
Klaus was up at first light to do the milking. The porch was on the side of the house away from the barn,
and Klaus never thought to look in on the girls. Bowser's failure to join him was no cause for alarm,
either. The dog held the cows and the chickens alike in great disdain, and usually hid in his doghouse
behind the barn when the chores were being performed, unless called ... and called energetically, at that.
Marjorie came downstairs fifteen minutes or so after her husband had pulled on his boots in the
mudroom and tromped out to the barn. She started the coffee, then put bacon on to fry. The combined
smells brought Howie down from his room under the eaves, but not the girls from the porch. She sent
Howie out to fetch them as she cracked eggs into the bacon grease. Klaus would want the girls out to get
fresh ones as soon as breakfast was over. Except no breakfast was eaten in the Detterick house that
morning. Howie came back from the porch, white around the gills and with his formerly sleep-puffy eyes
now wide open.
"They're gone," he said.
Marjorie went out onto the porch, at first more annoyed than alarmed. She said later that she had
supposed, if she had supposed anything, that the girls had decided to take a walk and pick flowers by the
dawn's early light. That or some similar green-girl foolishness. One look, and she understood why Howie
had been white.She screamed for Klaus - shrieked for him - and Klaus came on the dead run, his workboots whitened by
the half-full pail of milk he had spilled on them. What he found on the porch would have jellied the legs
of the most courageous parent. The blankets in which the girls would have bundled themselves as the
night drew on and grew colder had been cast into one comer. The screen door had been yanked off its
upper hinge and hung drunkenly out into the dooryard. And on the boards of both the porch and the steps
beyond the mutilated screen door, there were spatters of blood.
Marjorie begged her husband not to go hunting after the girls alone, and not to take their son if he felt he
had to go after them, but she could have saved her breath. He took the shotgun he kept mounted in the
mudroom high out of the reach of little hands, and gave Howie the .22 they had been saving for his
birthday in July. Then they went, neither of them paying the slightest attention to the shrieking, weeping
woman who wanted to know what they would do if they met a gang of wandering hobos or a bunch of
bad niggers escaped from the county farm over in Laduc. In this I think the men were right, you know.
The blood was no longer runny, but it was only tacky yet, and still closer to true red than the maroon that
comes when blood has well dried. The abduction hadn't happened too long ago. Klaus must have
reasoned that there was still a chance for his girls, and he meant to take it.
Neither one of them could track worth a damn - they were gatherers, not hunters, men who went into the
woods after coon and deer in their seasons not because they much wanted to, but because it was an
expected thing. And the dooryard around the house was a blighted patch of dirt with tracks all overlaid in
a meaningless tangle. They went around the barn, and saw almost at once why Bowser, a bad biter but a
good barker, hadn't sounded the alarm. He lay half in and half out of a doghouse which had been built of
leftover barnboards (there was a signboard with the word Bowser neatly printed on it over the curved
hole in the front - I saw a photograph of it in one of the papers), his head turned most of the way around
on his neck. It would have taken a man of enormous power to have done that to such a big animal, the
prosecutor later told John Coffey's jury ... and then he had looked long and meaningfully at the hulking
defendant, sitting behind the defense table with his eyes cast down and wearing a brand-new pair of
state-bought bib overalls that looked like damnation in and of themselves. Beside the dog, Klaus and
Howie found a scrap of cooked link sausage. The theory - a sound one, I have no doubt - was that Coffey
had first charmed the dog with treats, and then, as Bowser began to eat the last one, had reached out his
hands and broken its neck with one mighty snap of his wrists.
Beyond the barn was Detterick's north pasture, where no cows would graze that day. It was drenched
with morning dew, and leading off through it, cutting on a diagonal to the northwest and plain as day,
was the beaten track of a man's passage.
Even in his state of near-hysteria, Klaus Detterick hesitated at first to follow it. It wasn't fear of the man
or men who had taken his daughters; it was fear of following the abductor's backtrail ... of going off in
exactly the wrong direction at a time when every second might count.
Howie solved that dilemma by plucking a shred of yellow cotton cloth from a bush growing just beyond
the edge of the dooryard. Klaus was shown this same scrap of cloth as he sat on the witness stand, and
began to weep as he identified it as a piece of his daughter Kathe's sleeping-shorts. Twenty yards beyond
it, hanging from the jutting finger of a juniper shrub, they found a piece of faded green cloth that
matched the nightie Cora had been wearing when she kissed her ma and pa goodnight.
The Dettericks, father and son, set off at a near-run with their guns held in front of them, as soldiers do
when crossing contested ground under heavy fire. If I wonder at anything that happened that day. it isthat the boy, chasing desperately after his father (and often in danger of being left behind completely),
never fell and put a bullet in Klaus Detterick's back.
The farmhouse was on the exchange - another sign to the neighbors that the Dettericks were prospering,
at least moderately, in disastrous times - and Marjorie used Central to call as many of her neighbors that
were also on the exchange as she could, telling them of the disaster which had fallen like a
lightning-stroke out of a clear sky, knowing that each call would produce overlapping ripples, like
pebbles tossed rapidly into a stilly pond. Then she lifted the handset one last time, and spoke those words
that were almost a trademark of the early telephone systems of that time, at least in the rural South:
"Hello, Central, are you on the line?"
Central was, but for a moment could say nothing, that worthy woman was all agog. At last she managed,
"Yes, ma'am. Mrs. Detterick, I sure am, oh dear sweet blessed Jesus, I'm a-prayin right now that your
little girls are all right---!'
"Yes, thank you," Marjorie said. "But you tell the Lord to wait long enough for you to put me through to
the high sheriff's office down Tefton, all right?"
The Trapingus County high sheriff was a whiskeynosed old boy with a gut like a washtub and a head of
white hair so fine it looked like pipe-cleaner fuzz. I knew him well; he'd been up to Cold Mountain
plenty of times to see what he called "his boys" off into the great beyond. Execution witnesses sat in the
same folding chairs you've probably sat in yourself a time or two, at funerals or church suppers or
Grange bingo (in fact, we borrowed ours from the Mystic Tie No. 44 Grange back in those days), and
every time Sheriff Homer Cribus sat down in one, I waited for the dry crack that would signal collapse. I
dreaded that day and hoped for it, both at the same time, but it was a day that never came. Not long after
- couldn't have been more than one summer after the Detterick girls were abducted - he had a heart attack
in his office, apparently while screwing a seventeen year-old black girl named Daphne Shurtleff. There
was a lot of talk about that, with him always sporting his wife and six boys around so prominent come
election time - those were the days when, if you wanted to run for something, the saying used to be "Be
Baptist or be gone." But people love a hypocrite, you know - they recognize one of their own, and it
always feels so good when someone gets caught with his pants down and his dick up and it isn't you.
Besides being a hypocrite, he was incompetent, the kind of fellow who'd get himself photographed pet
that point, running southeast through low, wooded hills where families named Cray and Robinette and
Duplissey still made their own mandolins and often spat out their own rotted teeth as they plowed; deep
countryside where men were apt to handle snakes on Sunday morning and lie down in carnal embrace
with their daughters on Sunday night. I knew their families; most of them had sent Sparky a meal from
time to time. On the far side of the river, the members of the posse could see the June sun glinting off the
steel rails of a Great Southern branch line. About a mile downstream to their right, a trestle crossed
toward the coal-fields of West Green.
Here they found a wide trampled patch in the grass and low bushes, a patch so bloody that many of the
men had to sprint back into the woods and relieve themselves of their breakfasts. They also found the rest
of Cora's nightgown lying in this bloody patch, and Howie, who had held up admirably until then, reeled
back against his father and nearly fainted.
And it was here that Bobo Marchant's dogs had their first and only disagreement of the day. There were
six in all, two bloodhounds, two bluetick hounds, and a couple of those terrierlike mongrels borderSoutherners call coon hounds. The coonies wanted to go northwest, upstream along the Trapingus; the
rest wanted to go in the other direction, southeast. They got all tangled in their leads, and although the
papers said nothing about this part, I could imagine the horrible curses Bobo must have rained down on
them as he used his hands - surely the most educated part of him - to get them straightened around again.
I have known a few hound-dog men in my time, and it's been my experience that, as a class, they run
remarkably true to type.
Bobo shortleashed them into a pack, then ran Cora Detterick's torn nightgown under their noses, to kind
of remind them what they were doing out on a day when the temperature would be in the mid-nineties by
noon and the noseeums were already circling the heads of the possemen in clouds. The coonies took
another sniff, decided to vote the straight ticket, and off they all went downstream, in full cry.
It wasn't but ten minutes later when the men stopped, realizing they could hear more than just the dogs. It
was a howling rather than a baying, and a sound no dog had ever made, not even in its dying extremities.
It was a sound none of them had ever heard anything make, but they knew right away, all of them, that it
was a man. So they said, and I believed them. I think I would have recognized it, too. I have heard men
scream just that way, I think, on their way to the electric chair. Not a lot - most button themselves up and
go either quiet or joking, like it was the class picnic - but a few. Usually the ones who believe in hell as a
real place, and know it is waiting for them at the end of the Green Mile.
Bobo shortleashed his dogs again. They were valuable, and he had no intention of losing them to the
psychopath howling and gibbering just down yonder. The other men reloaded their guns and snapped
them closed. That howling had chilled them all, and made the sweat under their arms and running down
their backs feel like icewater. When men take a chill like that, they need a leader if they are to go on, and
Deputy McGee led them. He got out in front and walked briskly (I bet he didn't feel very brisk right then,
though) to a stand of alders that jutted out of the woods on the right, with the rest of them trundling along
nervously about five paces behind. He paused just once, and that was to motion the biggest man among
them - Sam Hollis - to keep near Klaus Detterick.
On the other side of the alders there was more open ground stretching back to the woods on the right. On
the left was the long, gentle slope of the riverbank. They all stopped where they were, thunderstruck. I
think they would have given a good deal to unsee what was before them, and none of them would ever
forget it - it was the sort of nightmare, bald and almost smoking in the sun, that lies beyond the drapes
and furnishings of good and ordinary lives - church suppers, walks along country lanes, honest work,
love-kisses in bed. There is a skull in every man, and I tell you there is a skull in the lives of all men.
They saw it that day, those men - they saw what sometimes grins behind the smile.
Sitting on the riverbank in a faded, bloodstained jumper was the biggest man any of them had ever seen -
John Coffey. His enormous, splay-toed feet were bare. On his head he wore a faded red bandanna, the
way a country woman would wear a kerchief into church. Gnats circled him in a black cloud. Curled in
each arm was the body of a naked girl. Their blonde hair, once curly and light as milkweed fluff, was
now matted to their heads and streaked red. The man holding them sat bawling up at the sky like a
moonstruck calf, his dark brown cheeks slicked with tears, his face twisted in a monstrous cramp of grief
He drew breath in hitches, his chest rising until the snaps holding the straps of his jumper were strained,
and then let that vast catch of air out in another of those howls. So often you read in the paper that "the
killer showed no remorse," but that wasn't the case here. John Coffey was torn open by what he had done
... but he would live. The girls would not. They had been torn open in a more fundamental way.No one seemed to know how long they stood there, looking at the howling man who was, in his turn,
looking across the great still plate of the river at a train on the other side, storming down the tracks
toward the trestle that crossed the river. It seemed they looked for an hour or for forever, and yet the train
got no farther along, it seemed to storm only in one place, like a child doing a tantrum, and the sun did
not go behind a cloud, and the sight was not blotted from their eyes. It was there before them, as real as a
dogbite. The black man rocked back and forth; Cora and Kathe rocked with him like dolls in the arms of
a giant. The bloodstained muscles in the man's huge, bare arms flexed and relaxed, flexed and relaxed,
flexed and relaxed.
It was Klaus Detterick who broke the tableau. Screaming, he flung himself at the monster who had raped
and killed his daughters. Sam Hollis knew his job and tried to do it, but couldn't. He was six inches taller
than Klaus and outweighed him by at least seventy pounds, but Klaus seemed to almost shrug his
encircling arms off. Klaus flew across the intervening open ground and launched a flying kick at Coffey's
head. His workboot, caked with spilled milk that had already soured in the heat, scored a direct hit on
Coffey's left temple, but Coffey seemed not to feel it at all. He only sat there, keening and rocking and
looking out across the river; the way I imagine it, he could almost have been a picture out of some piney
woods Pentecostal sermon, the faithful follower of the Cross looking out toward Goshen Land ... if not
for the corpses, that was.
It took four men to haul the hysterical farmer off John Coffey, and he fetched Coffey I don't know how
many good licks before they finally did. It didn't seem to matter to Coffey, one way or the other; he just
went on looking out across the river and keening. As for Detterick, all the fight went out of him when he
was finally pulled off - as if some strange galvanizing current had been running through the huge black
man (I still have a tendency to think in electrical metaphors; you'll have to pardon me), and when
Detterick's contact with that power source was finally broken, he went as limp as a man flung back from
a live wire. He knelt wide-legged on the riverbank with his hands to his face, sobbing. Howie joined him
and they hugged each other forehead to forehead.
Two men watched them while the rest formed a rifle-toting ring around the rocking, wailing black man.
He still seemed not to realize that anyone but him was there. McGee stepped forward, shifted uncertainly
from foot to foot for a bit, then hunkered.
"Mister," he said in a quiet voice, and Coffey hushed at once. McGee looked at eyes that were bloodshot
from crying. And still they streamed, as if someone had left a faucet on inside him. Those eyes wept, and
yet were somehow untouched ... distant and serene. I thought them the strangest eyes I had ever seen in
my life, and McGee felt much the same. "Like the eyes of an animal that never saw a man before," he
told a reporter named Hammersmith just before the trial.
"Mister, do you hear me?" McGee asked.
Slowly, Coffey nodded his head. Still he curled his arms around his unspeakable dolls, their chins down
on their chests so their faces could not be clearly seen, one of the few mercies God saw fit to bestow that
day.
"Do you have a name?" MeGee asked.
"John Coffey," he said in a thick and tear-clotted voice. "Coffey like the drink, only not spelled the same
way."McGee nodded, then pointed a thumb at the chest pocket of Coffey's jumper, which was bulging. It
looked to McGee like it might have been a gun - not that a man Coffey's size would need a gun to do
some major damage, if he decided to go off. "What's that in there, John Coffey? Is that maybe a heater?
A pistol?"
"Nosir," Coffey said in his thick voice, and those strange eyes - welling tears and agonized on top, distant
and weirdly serene underneath, as if the true John Coffey was somewhere else, looking out on some
other landscape where murdered little girls were nothing to get all worked up about -never left Deputy
McGee's. "That's just a little lunch I have."
"Oh, now, a little lunch, is that right?" McGee asked, and Coffey nodded and said yessir with his eyes
running and dear snot-runners hanging out of his nose. "And where did the likes of you get a little lunch,
John Coffey?" Forcing himself to be calm, although he could smell the girls by then, and could see the
flies lighting and sampling the places on them that were wet. It was their hair that was the worst, he said
later ... and this wasn't in any newspaper story; it was considered too grisly for family reading. No, this I
got from the reporter who wrote the story, Mr. Hammersmith. I looked him up later on, because later on
John Coffey became sort of an obsession with me. McGee told this Hammersmith that their blonde hair
wasn't blonde anymore. It was auburn. Blood had run down their cheeks out of it like it was a bad
dye-job, and you didn't have to be a doctor to see that their fragile skulls had been dashed together with
the force of those mighty arms. Probably they had been crying. Probably he had wanted to make them
stop. If the girls had been lucky, this had happened before the rapes.Looking at that made it hard for a man to think, even a man as determined to do his job as Deputy
McGee was. Bad thinking could cause mistakes, maybe more bloodshed. McGee drew him in a deep
breath and calmed himself. Tried, anyway.
'Wellsir, I don't exactly remember, be dog if I do," Coffey said in his tear-choked voice, "but it's a little
lunch, all right, sammidges and I think a swee' pickle."
I might just have a look for myself, it's all the same to you," McGee said. "Don't you move now, John
Coffey. Don't do it, boy, because there are enough guns aimed at you to make you disappear from the
waist up should you so much as twitch a finger."
Coffey looked out across the river and didn't move as McGee gently reached into the chest pocket of
those biballs and pulled out something wrapped in newspaper and tied with a hank of butcher's twine.
MeGee snapped the string and opened the paper, although he was pretty sure it was just what Coffey said
it was, a little lunch. There was a bacon-tomato sandwich and a jelly fold-over. There was also a pickle,
wrapped in its own piece of a funny page John Coffey would never be able to puzzle out. There were no
sausages. Bowser had gotten the sausages out of John Coffey's little lunch.
McGee handed the lunch back over his shoulder to one of the other men without taking his eyes off
Coffey. Hunkered down like that, he was too close to want to let his attention stray for even a second.
The lunch, wrapped up again and tied for good measure, finally ended up with Bobo Marchant, who put
it in his knapsack, where he kept treats for his dogs (and a few fishing lures, I shouldn't wonder). It
wasn't introduced into evidence at the trial - justice in this part of the world is swift, but not as swift as a
bacon-tomato sandwich goes over - though photographs of it were.
'What happened here, John Coffey?" McGee asked in his low, earnest voice. "You want to tell me that?"And Coffey said to McGee and the others almost exactly the same thing he said to me; they were also thelast words the prosecutor said to the jury at Coffey's trial. "I couldn't help it," John Coffey said, holding
the murdered, violated girls naked in his arms. The tears began to pour down his cheeks again. "I tried to
take it back, but it was too late!'
"Boy, you are under arrest for murder," McGee said, and then he spit in John Coffey's face.
The jury was out forty-five minutes. Just about time enough to eat a little lunch of their own. I wonder
they had any stomach for it.
5.
I think you know I didn't find all that out during one hot October afternoon in the soon-to-be-defunct
prison library, from one set of old newspapers stacked in a pair of Pomona orange crates, but I learned
enough to make it hard for me to sleep that night. When my wife got up at two in the morning and found
me sitting in the kitchen, drinking buttermilk and smoking home-rolled Bugler, she asked me what was
wrong and I lied to her for one of the few times in the long course of our marriage. I said I'd had another
run-in with Percy Wetmore. I had, of course, but that wasn't the reason she'd found me sitting up late. I
was usually able to leave Percy at the office.
'Well, forget that rotten apple and come on back to bed," she said. "I've got something that'll help you
sleep, and you can have all you want."
"That sounds good, but I think we'd better not," I said. "I've got a little something wrong with my
waterworks, and wouldn't want to pass it on to you."
She raised an eyebrow. "Waterworks, huh," she said. "I guess you must have taken up with the wrong
streetcorner girl the last time you were in Baton Rouge." I've never been in Baton Rouge and never so
much as touched a streetcorner girl, and we both knew it.
"It's just a plain old urinary infection," I said. "My mother used to say boys got them from taking a leak
when the north wind was blowing."
"Your mother also used to stay in all day if she spilled the salt," my wife said. "Dr Sadler-"
"No, sir," I said, raising my hand. "He'll want me to take sulfa, and I'll be throwing up in every comer of
my office by the end of the week. It'll run its course, but in the meantime, I guess we best stay out of the
playground."
She kissed my forehead right over my left eyebrow, which always gives me the prickles ... as Janice well
knew. "Poor baby. As if that awful Percy Wetmore wasn't enough. Come to bed soon!'
I did, but before I did, I stepped out onto the back porch to empty out (and checked the wind direction
with a wet thumb before I did - what our parents tell us when we are small seldom goes ignored, no
matter how foolish it may be). Peeing outdoors is one joy of country living the poets never quite got
around to, but it was no joy that night; the water coming out of me burned like a line of lit coal-oil. Yet I
thought it had been a little worse that afternoon, and knew it had been worse the two or three days before.
I had hopes that maybe I had started to mend. Never was a hope more ill-founded. No one had told me
that sometimes a bug that gets up inside there, where it's warm and wet, can take a day or two off to rest
before coming on strong again. I would have been surprised to know it. I would have been even moresurprised to know that, in another fifteen or twenty years, there would be pills you could take that would
smack that sort of infection out of your system in record time ... and while those pills might make you
feel a little sick at your stomach or loose in your bowels, they almost never made you vomit the way Dr.
Sadler's sulfa pills did. Back in '32, there wasn't much you could do but wait, and try to ignore that
feeling that someone had spilled coal-oil inside your works and then touched a match to it.
I finished my butt, went into the bedroom, and finally got to sleep. I dreamed of girls with shy smiles and
blood in their hair.
6.
The next morning there was a pink memo slip on my desk, asking me to stop by the warden's office as
soon as I could. I knew what that was about - there were unwritten but very important rules to the game,
and I had stopped playing by them for awhile yesterday - and so I put it off as long as possible. Like
going to the doctor about my waterworks problem, I suppose. I've always thought this "get-it-over-with"
business was overrated.
Anyway, I didn't hurry to Warden Moores's office. I stripped off my wool uniform coat instead, hung it
over the back of my chair, and turned on the fan in the corner - it was another hot one. Then I sat down
and went over Brutus Howell's night-sheet. There was nothing there to get alarmed about. Delacroix had
wept briefly after turning in - he did most nights, and more for himself than for the folks he had roasted
alive, I am quite sure - and then had take Mr. Jingles, the mouse, out of the cigar box he slept in. That
had calmed Del, and he had slept like a baby the rest of the night. Mr. Jingles had most likely spent it on
Delacroix's stomach, with his tail curled over his paws, eyes unblinking. It was as if God had decided
Delacroix needed a guardian angel, but had decreed in His wisdom that only a mouse would do for a rat
like our homicidal friend from Louisiana. Not all that was in Brutal's report, of course, but I had done
enough night watches myself to fill in the stuff between the lines. There was a brief note about Coffey:
"Laid awake, mostly quiet, may have cried some. I tried to get some talk started, but after a few grunted
replies from Coffey, gave up. Paul or Harry may have better luck."
"Getting the talk started" was at the center of our job, really. I didn't know it then, but looking back from
the vantage point of this strange old age (I think all old ages seem strange to the folk who must endure
them), I understand that it was, and why I didn't see it then - it was too big, as central to our work as our
respiration was to our lives. It wasn't important that the floaters be good at "getting the talk started," but
it was vital for me and Harry and Brutal and Dean... and it was one reason why Percy Wetmore was such
a disaster. The inmates hated him, the guards hated him ... everyone hated him, presumably, except for
his political connections, Percy himself, and maybe (but only maybe) his mother. He was like a dose of
white arsenic sprinkled into a wedding cake, and I think I knew he spelled disaster the start. He was an
accident waiting to happen. As for the rest of us, we would have scoffed at the idea that we functioned
most usefully not as the guards of the condemned but as their psychiatrists part of me still wants to scoff
at that idea today - but we knew about getting the talk started . . . and without the talk, men facing Old
Sparky had a nasty habit of going insane.
I made a note at the bottom of Brutal's report to talk to John Coffey - to try, at least - and then passed on
to a note from Curtis Anderson, the warden's chief assistant. It said that he, Anderson, expected a DOE
order for Edward Delacrois (Anderson's misspelling; the man's name was actually Eduard Delacroix)
very soon. DOE stood for date of execution, and according to the note, Curtis had been told on good
authority that the little Frenchman would take the walk shortly before Halloween - October 27th was hisbest guess, and Curtis Anderson's guesses were very informed. But before then we could expect a new
resident, name of William Wharton. "He's what you like to call 'a problem child,' " Curtis had written ' in
his backslanting and somehow prissy script. "Crazy-wild and proud of it. Has rambled all over the state
for the last year or so, and has hit the big time at last. Killed three people in a holdup, one a pregnant
woman, killed a fourth in the getaway. State Patrolman. All he missed was a nun and a blind man!' I
smiled a little at that. "Wharton is 19 years old, has Billy the Kid tattooed on upper l. forearm. You will
have to slap his nose a time or two, I guarantee you that, but be careful when you do it. This man just
doesn't care." He had underlined this last sentiment twice, then finished: "Also, he may be a
hang-arounder. He's working appeals, and there's the fact that he is a minor."
A crazy kid, working appeals, apt to be around for awhile. Oh, that all sounded just fine. Suddenly the
day seemed hotter than ever, and I could no longer put off seeing Warden Moores.
I worked for three wardens during my years as a Cold Mountain guard; Hal Moores was the last and best
of them. In a walk. Honest, straightforward, lacking even Curtis Anderson's rudimentary wit, but
equipped with just enough political savvy to keep his job during those grim years ... and enough integrity
to keep from getting seduced by the game. He would not rise any higher, but that seemed all right with
him. He was fifty-eight or -nine back then, with a deeply lined bloodhound face that Bobo Marchant
probably would have felt right at home with. He had white hair and his hands shook with some sort of
palsy, but he was strong. The year before, when a prisoner had rushed him in the exercise yard with a
shank whittled out of a crate-slat, Moores had stood his ground, grabbed the skatehound's wrist, and had
twisted it so hard that the snapping bones had sounded like dry twigs burning in a hot fire. The
skatehound, all his grievances forgotten, had gone down on his knees in the dirt and begun screaming for
his mother. "I'm not her," Moores said in his cultured Southern voice, "But if I was, I'd raise up my skirts
and piss on you from the loins that gave you birth."
When I came into his office, he started to get up and I waved him back down. I took the seat across the
desk from him, and began by asking about his wife ... except in our part of the world, that's not how you
do it. "How's that pretty gal of yours" is what I asked, as if Melinda had seen only seventeen summers
instead of sixty-two or -three. My concern was genuine he was a woman I could have loved and married
myself, if the lines of our lives had coincided - but I didn't mind diverting him a little from his main
business, either.
He sighed deeply. "Not so well, Paul. Not so well at all."
"More headaches?"
"Only one this week, but it was the worst yet - put her flat on her back for most of the day before
yesterday. And now she's developed this weakness in her right hand-" He raised his own liverspotted
right hand. We both watched it tremble above his blotter for a moment or two, and then he lowered it
again. I could tell he would have given just about anything not to be telling me what he was telling me,
and I would have given just about anything not to be hearing it. Melinda's headaches had started in the
spring, and all that summer her doctor had been saying they were "nervous-tension migraines," perhaps
caused by the stress of Hal's coming retirement. Except that neither of them could wait for his retirement,
and my own wife had told me that migraine is not a disease of the old but the young; by the time its
sufferers reached Melinda Moores's age, they were usually getting better, not worse. And now this
weakness of the hand. It didn't sound like nervous tension to me; it sounded like a damned stroke."Dr. Haverstrom wants her to go in hospital up to Indianola," Moores said. "Have some tests. Head
X-rays, he means. Who knows what else. She is scared to death!' He paused, then added, "Truth to tell,
so am I."
"Yeah, but you see she does it," I said. "Don't wait. If it turns out to be something they can see with an
X-ray, it may turn out to be something they can fix."
"Yes," he agreed, and then, for just a moment - the only one during that part of our interview, as I recall -
our eyes met and locked. There was the sort of nakedly perfect understanding between us that needs no
words. It could be a stroke, yes. It could also be a cancer growing in her brain, and if it was that, the
chances that the doctors at Indianola could do anything about it were slim going on none. This was '32,
remember, when even something as relatively simple as a urinary infection was either sulfa and stink or
suffer and wait.
"I thank you for your concern, Paul. Now let's talk about Percy Wetmore!'
I groaned and covered my eyes.
"I had a call from the state capital this morning," the warden said evenly. "It was quite an angry call, as
I'm sure you can imagine. Paul, the governor is so married he's almost not there, if you take my meaning.
And his wife has a brother who has one child. That child is Percy Wetmore. Percy called his dad last
night, and Percy's dad called Percy's aunt. Do I have to trace the rest of this out for you?"
'No," I said. "Percy squealed. Just like the schoolroom sissy telling teacher he saw Jack and Jill
smooching in the cloakroom."
"Yep," Moores agreed, "that's about the size of it."
"You know what happened between Percy and Delacroix when Delacroix came in?" I asked. "Percy and
his damned hickory billy-club?"
"Yes, but - "
"And you know how he runs it along the bars sometimes, just for the pure hell of it. He's mean, and he's
stupid, and I don't know how much longer I can take him. That's the truth."
We'd known each other five years. That can be a long time for men who get on well, especially when part
of the job is trading life for death. What I'm saying is that he understood what I meant. Not that I would
quit; not with the Depression walking around outside the prison walls like a dangerous criminal, one that
couldn't be caged as our charges were. Better men than me were out on the roads or riding the rods. I was
lucky and knew it - children grown and the mortgage, that two-hundred-pound block of marble, had been
off my chest for the last two years. But a man's got to eat, and his wife has to eat, too. Also, we were
used to sending our daughter and son-in-law twenty bucks whenever we could afford it (and sometimes
when we couldn't, if Jane's letters sounded particularly desperate). He was an out-of-work high-school
teacher, and if that didn't qualify for desperate back in those days, then the word had no meaning. So no,
you didn't walk off a steady paycheck job like mine ... not in cold blood, that was. But my blood wasn't
cold that fall. The temperatures outside were unseasonable, and the infection crawling around inside me
had turned the thermostat up even more. And when a man's in that kind of situation, why, sometimes his
fist flies out pretty much of its own accord. And if you slug a connected man like Percy Wetmore once,
you might as well just go right on slugging, because there's no going back."Stick with it," Moores said quietly. "That's what I called you in here to say. I have it on good authority -
the person who called me this morning, in fact - that Percy has an application in at Briar, and that his
application will be accepted."
"Briar," I said. That was Briar Ridge, one of two state-run hospitals. 'What's this kid doing? Touring state
facilities?"
"It's an administration job. Better pay, and papers to push instead of hospital beds in the heat of the day."
He gave me a slanted grin. "You know, Paul, you might be shed of him already if you hadn't put him in
the switch-room with Van Hay when The Chief walked."
For a moment what he said seemed so peculiar I didn't have a clue what he was getting at. Maybe I didn't
want to have a clue.
"Where else would I put him?" I asked. "Christ, he hardly knows what he's doing on the block! To make
him part of the active execution team - " I didn't finish. Couldn't finish. The potential for screw-ups
seemed endless.
"Nevertheless, you'd do well to put him out for Delacroix. If you want to get rid of him, that is."
I looked at him with my jaw hung. At last I was able to get it up where it belonged so I could talk. "What
are you saying? That he wants to experience one right up close where he can smell the guy's nuts
cooking?"
Moores shrugged. His eyes, so soft when he had been speaking about his wife, now looked flinty.
"Delacroix's nuts are going to cook whether Wetmore's on the team or not," he said. "Correct?"
"Yes, but he could screw up. In fact, Hal, he's almost bound to screw up. And in front of thirty or so
witnesses ... reporters all the way up from Louisiana . . ."
"You and Brutus Howell will make sure he doesn't," Moores said. "And if he does anyway, it goes on his
record, and it'll still be there long after his statehouse connections are gone. You understand?"
I did. It made me feel sick and scared, but I did.
"He may want to stay for Coffey, but if we're lucky, he'll get all he needs from Delacroix. You just make
sure you put him out for that one."
I had planned to stick Percy in the switch-room again, then down in the tunnel, riding shotgun on the
gurney that would take Delacroix to the meatwagon parked across the road from the prison, but I tossed
all those plans back over my shoulder without so much as a second look. I nodded. I had the sense to
know it was a gamble I was taking, but I didn't care. If it would get rid of Percy Wetmore, I'd tweak the
devil's nose. He could take part in his execution, clamp on the cap, and then look through the grille and
tell Van Hay to roll on two; he could watch the little Frenchman ride the lightning that he, Percy
Wetmore, had let out of the bottle. Let him have his nasty little thrill, if that's what state-sanctioned
murder was to him. Let him go on to Briar Ridge, where he would have his own office and a fan to cool
it. And if his uncle by marriage was voted out of office in the next election and he had to find out what
work was like in the tough old sunbaked world where not all the bad guys were locked behind bars and
sometimes you got your own head whipped, so much the better."All right," I said, standing up. "I'll put him out front for Delacroix. And in the meantime, I'll keep the
peace."
"Good," he said, and stood up himself. "By the way, how's that problem of yours?" He pointed delicately
in the direction of my groin.
"Seems a little better."
'Well, that's fine." He saw me to the door. "What about Coffey, by the way? Is he going to be a
problem?"
"I don't think so," I said. "So far he's been as quiet as a dead rooster. He's strange - strange eyes - but
quiet. We'll keep tabs on him, though. Don't worry about that!"
"You know what he did, of course."
"Sure."
He was seeing me through to the outer office by then, where old Miss Hannah sat bashing away at her
Underwood as she had ever since the last ice age had ended, it seemed. I was happy to go. All in all, I felt
as if I'd gotten off easy. And it was nice to know there was a chance of surviving Percy, after all.
"You send Melinda a whole basket of my love," I said. "And don't go buying you an extra crate of
trouble, either. It'll probably turn out to be nothing but migraine, after all."
"You bet," he said, and below his sick eyes, his lips smiled. The combination was damned near ghoulish.
As for me, I went back to E Block to start another day. There was paperwork to be read and written, there
were floors to be mopped, there were meals to be served, a duty roster to be made out for the following
week, there were a hundred details to be seen to. But mostly there was waiting - in prison there's always
plenty of that, so much it never gets done. Waiting for Eduard Delacroix to walk the Green Mile, waiting
for William Wharton to arrive with his curled lip and Billy the Kid tattoo, and, most of all, waiting for
Percy Wetmore to be gone out of my life.
7.
Delacroix's mouse was one of God's mysteries. I never saw one in E Block before that summer, and
never saw one after that fall, when Delacroix passed from our company on a hot and thundery night in
October - passed from it in a manner so unspeakable I can barely bring myself to recall it. Delacroix
claimed that he trained that mouse, which started its life among us as Steamboat Willy, but I really think
it was the other way around. Dean Stanton felt the same way, and so did Brutal. Both of them were there
the night the mouse put in its first appearance, and as Brutal said, "The thing 'us half-tame already, and
twice as smart as that Cajun what thought he owned it."
Dean and I were in my office, going over the record-box for the last year, getting ready to write
follow-up letters to witnesses of five executions, and to write follow-ups to follow-ups in another six
stretching all the way back to '29. Basically, we wanted to know just one thing: were they pleased with
the service? I know it sounds grotesque, but it was an important consideration. As taxpayers they were
our customers, but very special ones. A man or a woman who will turn out at midnight to watch a man
die has got a special, pressing reason to be there, a special need, and if execution is a proper punishment,then that need ought to be satisfied. They've had a nightmare. The purpose of the execution is to show
them that the nightmare is over. Maybe it even works that way. Sometimes.
"Hey!" Brutal called from outside the door, where he was manning the desk at the head of the hall. "Hey,
you two! Get out here!"
Dean and I gazed at each other with identical expressions of alarm, thinking that something had
happened to either the Indian from Oklahoma (his name was Arlen Bitterbuck, but we called him The
Chief ... or, in Harry Terwilliger's case, Chief Coat Cheese, because that was what Harry claimed
Bitterbuck smelled like), or the fellow we called The President. But then Brutal started to laugh, and we
hurried to see what was happening. Laughing in E Block sounded almost as wrong as laughing in church.
Old Toot-Toot, the trusty who ran the food-wagon in those days, had been by with his holy-rolling
cartful of goodies, and Brutal had stocked up for a long night - three sandwiches, two pops, and a couple
of moon pies. Also a side of potato salad Toot had undoubtedly filched from the prison kitchen, which
was supposed to be off-limits to him. Brutal had the logbook open in front of him, and for a wonder he
hadn't spilled anything on it yet. Of course, he was just getting started.
'What?" Dean asked. "What is it?"
"State legislature must have opened the pursestrings enough to hire another screw this year after all,"
Brutal said, still laughing. "Lookie yonder."
He pointed and we saw the mouse. I started to laugh, too, and Dean joined in. You really couldn't help it,
because a guard doing quarter-hour check rounds was just like that mouse looked like: a tiny, furry guard
making sure no one was trying to escape or commit suicide. It would trot a little way toward us along the
Green Mile, then turn its head from side to side, as if checking the cells. Then it would make another
forward spurt. The fact that we could hear both of our current inmates snoring away in spite of the
yelling and the laughter somehow made it even funnier.
It was a perfectly ordinary brown mouse, except for the way it seemed to be checking into the cells. It
even went into one or two of them, skipping nimbly in between the lower bars in a way I imagine many
of our inmates, past and present, would envy. Except it was out that the cons would always be wanting to
skip, of course.
The mouse didn't go into either of the occupied cells; only the empties. And finally it had worked its way
almost up to where we were. I kept expecting it to turn back, but it didn't. It showed no fear of us at all.
"It ain't normal for a mouse to come up on people that way," Dean said, a little nervously. "Maybe it's
rabid."
"Oh, my Christ," Brutal said through a mouthful of corned-beef sandwich. "The big mouse expert. The
Mouse Man. You see it foamin at the mouth, Mouse Man?"
"I can't see its mouth at all," Dean said, and that made us all laugh again. I couldn't see its mouth, either,
but I could see the dark little drops that were its eyes, and they didn't look crazy or rabid to me. They
looked interested and intelligent. I've put men to death - men with supposedly immortal souls - that
looked dumber than that mouse.
It scurried up the Green Mile to a spot that was less than three feet from the duty desk ... which wasn'tsomething fancy, like you might be imagining, but only the sort of desk the teachers used to sit behind upat the district high school. And there it did stop, curling its tail around its paws as prim as an old lady
settling her skirts.
I stopped laughing all at once, suddenly feeling cold through my flesh all the way to the bones. I want to
say I don't know why I felt that way - no one likes to come out with something that's going to make them
look or sound ridiculous - but of course I do, and if I can tell the truth about the rest, I guess I can tell the
truth about this. For a moment I imagined myself to be that mouse, not a guard at all but just another
convicted criminal there on the Green Mile, convicted and condemned but still managing to look bravely
up at a desk that must have seemed miles high to it (as the judgment seat of God will no doubt someday
seem to us), and at the heavy-voiced, blue-coated giants who sat behind it. Giants that shot its kind with
BB guns, or swatted them with brooms, or set traps on them, traps that broke their backs while they crept
cautiously over the word VICTOR to nibble at the cheese on the little copper plate.
There was no broom by the duty desk, but there was a rolling mop-bucket with the mop still in the
wringer; I'd taken my turn at swabbing the green lino and all six of the cells shortly before sitting down
to the record-box with Dean. I saw that Dean meant to grab the mop- and take a swing with it. I touched
his wrist just as his fingers touched the slender wooden handle. "Leave it be," I said.
He shrugged and drew his hand back. I had a feeling he didn't want to swat it any more than I did.
Brutal tore a corner off his corned-beef sandwich and held it out over the front of the desk, tweezed
delicately between two fingers. The mouse seemed to look up with an even livelier interest, as if it knew
exactly what it was. Probably did; I could see its whiskers twitch as its nose wriggled.
"Aw, Brutal, no!" Dean exclaimed, then looked at me. "Don't let him do that, Paul! If he's gonna feed the
damn thing, we might as well put out the welcome mat for anything on four legs.-"
"I just want to see what he'll do," Brutal said. "In the interests of science, like." He looked at me - I was
the boss, even in such minor detours from routine as this. I thought about it and shrugged like it didn't
matter much, one way or another. The truth was, I kind of wanted to see what he'd do, too.
Well, he ate it - of course. There was a Depression on, after all. But the way he ate it fascinated us all. He
approached the fragment of sandwich, sniffed his way around it, and then he sat up in front of it like a
dog doing a trick, grabbed it, and pulled the bread apart to get at the meat. He did it as deliberately and
knowingly as a man tucking into a good roast-beef dinner in his favorite restaurant. I never saw an
animal eat like that, not even a well-trained house dog. And all the while he was eating, his eyes never
left us.
"Either one smart mouse or hungry as hell," a new voice said. It was Bitterbuck. He had awakened and
now stood at the bars of his cell, naked except for a pair of saggy-seated boxer shorts. A home-rolled
cigarette poked out from between the second and third knuckles of his right hand, and his iron-gray hair
lay over his shoulders - once probably muscular but now beginning to soften - in a pair of braids.
"You got any Injun wisdom about micies, Chief?" Brutal asked, watching the mouse eat. We were all
pretty fetched by the neat way it held the bit of corned beef in its forepaws, occasionally turning it or
glancing at it, as if in admiration and appreciation.
"Naw," Bitterbuck said. "Knowed a brave once had a pair of what he claimed were mouse-skin gloves,but I didn't believe it!" Then he laughed, as if the whole thing was a joke, and left the bars. We heard the
bunk creak as he lay down again.
That seemed to be the mouse's signal to go. It finished up what it was holding, sniffed at what was left
(mostly bread with yellow mustard soaking into it), and then looked back at us, as if it wanted to
remember our faces if we met again. Then it turned and scurried off the way it had come, not pausing to
do any cell-checks this time. Its hurry made me think of the White Rabbit in Alice's Adventures in
Wonderland, and I smiled. It didn't pause at the door to the restraint room, but disappeared beneath it.
The restraint room had soft walls, for people whose brains had softened a little. We kept cleaning
equipment stored in there when we didn't need the room for its created purpose, and a few books (most
were westerns by Clarence Mulford, but one-loaned out only on special occasions - featured a profusely
illustrated tale in which Popeye, Bluto, and even Wimpy the hamburger fiend took turns shtupping Olive
Oyl). There were craft items as well, including the crayons Delacroix later put to some good use. Not that
he was our problem yet; this was earlier, remember. Also in the restraint room was the jacket no one
wanted to wear - white, made of double-sewn canvas, and with the buttons and snaps and buckles going
up the back. We all knew how to zip a problem child into that jacket lickety-larrup. They didn't get
violent often, our lost boys, but when they did, brother, you didn't wait around for the situation to
improve on its own.
Brutal reached into the desk drawer above the kneehole and brought out the big leather-bound book with
the word VISITORS stamped on the front in gold leaf. Ordinarily, that book stayed in the drawer from
one month to the next. When a prisoner had visitors - unless it was a lawyer or a minister - he went over
to the room off the messhall that was kept special for that purpose. The Arcade, we called it. I don't know
why.
"Just what in the Gorry do you think you're doing?" Dean Stanton asked, peering over the tops of his
spectacles as Brutal opened the book and paged grandly past years of visitors to men now dead.
"Obeyin Regulation 19," Brutal said, finding the current page. He took the pencil and licked the tip - a
disagreeable habit of which he could not be broken - and prepared to write. Regulation 19 stated simply:
"Each visitor to E Block shall show a yellow Administration pass and shall be recorded without fail"
"He's gone nuts," Dean said to me.
"He didn't show us his pass, but I'm gonna let it go this time," Brutal said. He gave the tip of his pencil an
extra lick for good luck, then filled in 9:49 p.m. under the column headed TIME ON BLOCK.
"Sure, why not, the big bosses probably make exceptions for mice," I said.
"Course they do," Brutal agreed. "Lack of pockets." He turned to look at the wall-clock behind the desk,
then printed 10:01 in the column headed TIME OFF BLOCK. The longer space between these two
numbers was headed NAME OF VISITOR. After a moment's hard thought - probably to muster his
limited spelling skills, as I'm sure the idea was in his head already - Brutus Howell carefully wrote
STEAMBOAT WILLY, which was what most people called Mickey Mouse back in those days. It was
because of that first talkie cartoon, where he rolled his eyes and bumped his hips around and pulled the
whistle cord in the pilothouse of the steamboat.
"There," Brutal said, slamming the book closed and returning it to its drawer, "all done and buttoned up."I laughed, but Dean, who couldn't help being serious about things even when he saw the joke, was
frowning and polishing his glasses furiously. "You'll be in trouble if someone sees that." He hesitated and
added, "The wrong someone." He hesitated again, looking nearsightedly around almost as if he expected
to see that the walls had grown ears, before finishing: "Someone like Percy
Kiss-My-Ass-and-Go-to-Heaven Wetmore."
"Huh," Brutal said. - The day Percy Wetmore sits his narrow shanks down here at this desk will be the
day I resign."
"You won't have to," Dean said. "They'll fire you for making jokes in the visitors' book if Percy puts the
right word in the right ear. And he can. You know he can!'
Brutal glowered but said nothing. I reckoned that later on that night he would erase what he had written.
And if he didn't, I would.
The next night, after getting first Bitterbuck and then The President over to D Block, where we showered
our group after the regular cons were locked down, Brutal asked me if we shouldn't have a look for
Steamboat Willy down there in the restraint room.
"I guess we ought to," I said. We'd had a good laugh over that mouse the night before, but I knew that if
Brutal and I found it down there in the restraint room - particularly if we found it had gnawed itself the
beginnings of a nest in one of the padded walls - we would kill it. Better to kill the scout, no matter how
amusing it might be, than have to live with the pilgrims. And, I shouldn't have to tell you, neither of us
was very squeamish about a little mouse-murder. Killing rats was what the state paid us for, after all.
But we didn't find Steamboat Willy - later to be known as Mr. Jingles - that night, not nested in the soft
walls, or behind any of the collected junk we hauled out into the corridor. There was a great deal of junk,
too, more than I would have expected, because we hadn't had to use the restraint room in a long time.
That would change with the advent of William Wharton, but of course we didn't know that at the time.
Lucky us.
"Where'd it go?" Brutal asked at last, wiping sweat off the back of his neck with a big blue bandanna.
"No hole, no crack ... there's that, but - " He pointed to the drain in the floor. Below the grate, which the
mouse could have gotten through, was a fine steel mesh that not even a fly would have passed. "How'd it
get in? How'd it get out?"
"I don't know," I said.
"He did come in here, didn't he? I mean, the three of us saw him."
"Yep, right under the door. He had to squeeze a little, but he made it.""Gosh," Brutal said - a word that sounded strange, coming from a man that big. "It's a good thing the
cons can't make themselves small like that, isn't it?"
"You bet," I said, running my eye over the canvas walls one last time, looking for a hole, a crack,
anything. There was nothing. "Come on. Let's go."
Steamboat Willy showed up again three nights later, when Harry Terwilliger was on the duty desk. Percy
was also on, and chased the mouse back down the Green Mile with the same mop Dean had beenthinking of using. The rodent avoided Percy easily, slipping through the crack beneath the restraint-room
door a hands-down winner. Cursing at the top of his voice, Percy unlocked the door and hauled all that
shit out again. It was funny and scary at the same time, Harry said. Percy was vowing he'd catch the
goddam mouse and tear its diseased little head right off, but he didn't, of course. Sweaty and disheveled,
the shirttail of his uniform hanging out in the back, he returned to the duty desk half an hour later,
brushing his hair out of his eyes and telling Harry (who had sat serenely reading through most of the
ruckus) that he was going to put a strip of insulation on the bottom of the door down there; that would
solve the vermin problem, he declared.
"Whatever you think is best, Percy," Harry said, turning a page of the oat opera he was reading. He
thought Percy would forget about blocking the crack at the bottom of that door, and he was right.
8.
Late that winter, long after these events were over, Brutal came to me one night when it was just the two
of us, E Block temporarily empty and all the other guards temporarily reassigned. Percy had gone on to
Briar Ridge.
"Come here," Brutal said in a funny, squeezed voice that made me look around at him sharply. I had just
come in out of a cold and sleety night, and had been brushing off the shoulders of my coat prior to
hanging it up.
"Is something wrong?" I asked.
"No," he said, "but I found out where Mr. Jingles was staying. When he first came, I mean, before
Delacroix took him over. Do you want to see?"
Of course I did. I followed him down the Green Mile to the restraint room. All the stuff we kept stored
there was out in the hall; Brutal had apparently taken advantage of the lull in customer traffic to do some
cleaning up. The door was open, and I saw our mop-bucket inside. The floor, that same sick lime shade
as the Green Mile itself, was drying in streaks. Standing in the middle of the floor was a stepladder, the
one that was usually kept in the storage room, which also happened to serve as the final stop for the
state's condemned. There was a shelf jutting out from the back of the ladder near the top, the sort of thing
a workman would use to hold his toolkit or a painter the bucket he was working out of. There was a
flashlight on it. Brutal handed it to me.
"Get on up there. You're shorter than me, so you'll have to go pretty near all the way, but I'll hold your
legs!"
"I'm ticklish down there," I said, starting up. "Especially my knees!'"I'll mind that!"
"Good," I said, "because a broken hip's too high a price to pay in order to discover the origins of a single
mouse."
"Huh?"
"Never mind." My head was up by the caged light in the center of the ceiling by then, and I could feel the
ladder wiggling a little under my weight. Outside, I could hear the winter wind moaning. "Just hold ontome."
"I got you, don't worry." He gripped my calves firmly, and I went up one more step. Now the top of my
head was less than a foot from the ceiling, and I could see the cobwebs a few enterprising spiders had
spun in the crotches where the roof beams came together. I shone the light around but didn't see anything
worth the risk of being up here.
'No," Brutal said. "You're looking too far away, Paul. Look to your left, where those two beams come
together. You see them? One's a little discolored!'
"I see."
"Shine the light on the join!"
I did, and saw what he wanted me to see almost right away. The beams had been pegged together with
dowels, half a dozen of them, and one was gone, leaving a black, circular hole the size of a quarter. I
looked at it, then looked doubtfully back over my shoulder at Brutal. "It was a small mouse," I said, "but
that small? Man, I don't think so."
"But that's where he went," Brutal said. "I'm just as sure as houses.""I don't see how you can be."
"Lean closer - don't worry I got you - and take a whiff."
I did as he asked, groping with my left hand for one of the other beams, and feeling a little better when I
had hold of it. The wind outside gusted again; air puffed out of that hole and into my face. I could smell
the keen breath of a winter night in the border South ... and something else, as well.
The smell of peppermint.
Don't let nothing happen to Mr. Jingles, I could hear Delacroix saying in a voice that wouldn't stay
steady I could hear that, and I could feel the warmth of Mr. Jingles as the Frenchman handed it to me,
just a mouse, smarter than most of the species, no doubt, but still just a mouse for a' that and a' that. Don't
let that bad 'un hurt my mouse, he'd said, and I had promised, as I always promised them at the end when
walking the Green Mile was no longer a myth or a hypothesis but something they really had to do. Mail
this letter to my brother, who I haven't seen for twenty years? I promise. Say fifteen Hail Marys for my
soul? I promise. Let me die under my spirit-name and see that it goes on my tombstone? I promise. It was
the way you got them to go and be good about it, the way you saw them into the chair sitting at the end
of the Green Mile with their sanity intact. I couldn't keep all of those promises, of course, but I kept the
one I made to Delacroix. As for the Frenchman himself, there had been hell to pay. The bad 'un had hurt
Delacroix, hurt him plenty. Oh, I know what he did, all right, but no one deserved what happened to
Eduard Delacroix when he fell into Old Sparky's savage embrace.
A smell of peppermint.
And something else. Something back inside that hole.
I took a pen out of my breast pocket with my right hand, still holding onto the beam with my left, not
worried anymore about Brutal inadvertently tickling my sensitive knees. I unscrewed the pen's cap
onehanded, then poked the nib in and teased something out. It was a tiny splinter of wood which hadbeen tinted a bright yellow, and I heard Delacroix's voice again, so clearly this time that his ghost might
have been lurking in that room with us - the one where William Wharton spent so much of his time.
Hey, you guys! the voice said this time-the laughing, amazed voice of a man who has forgotten, at least
for a little while, where he is and what awaits him. Come and see what Mr. Jingles can do!
"Christ," I whispered. I felt as if the wind had been knocked out of me."You found another one, didn't you?" Brutal asked. "I found three or four."
I came down and shone the light on his big, outstretched palm. Several splinters of wood were scattered
there, like jackstraws for elves. Two were yellow, like the one I had found. One was green and one was
red. They hadn't been painted but colored, with wax Crayola crayons.
"Oh, boy," I said in a low, shaky voice. "Oh, hey. It's pieces of that spool, isn't it? But why? Why up
there?"
"When I was a kid I wasn't big like I am now," Brutal said. "I got most of my growth between fifteen and
seventeen. Until then I was a shrimp. And when I went off to school the first time, I felt as small as ...
why, as small as a mouse, I guess you'd say. I was scared to death. So you know what I did?"
I shook my head. Outside, the wind gusted again. In the angles formed by the beams, cobwebs shook in
feathery drafts, like rotted lace. Never had I been in a place that felt so nakedly haunted, and it was right
then, as we stood there looking down at the splintered remains of the spool which had caused so much
trouble, that my head began to know what my heart had understood ever since John Coffey had walked
the Green Mile: I couldn't do this job much longer. Depression, or no Depression, I couldn't watch many
more men walk through my office to their deaths. Even one more might be too many.
"I asked my mother for one of her hankies," Brutal said. "So when I felt weepy and small, I could sneak
it out and smell her perfume and not feel so bad."
"You think - what? - that mouse chewed off some of that colored spool to remember Delacroix by? That
a mouse -"
He looked up. I thought for a moment I saw tears in his eyes, but I guess I was probably wrong about
that. "I ain't saying nothing, Paul. But I found them up there, and I smelled peppermint, same as you -
you know you did. And I can't do this no more. I won't do this no more. Seeing one more man in that
chair'd just about kill me. I'm going to put in for a transfer to Boys' Correctional on Monday. If I get it
before the next one, that's fine. If I don't, I'll resign and go back to farming."
"What did you ever farm, besides rocks?"
"It don't matter."
"I know it doesn't," I said. "I think I'll put in with you.-"
He looked at me close, making sure I wasn't just having some sport with him, then nodded as if it was a
settled thing. The wind gusted again, strong enough this time to make the beams creak and settle, and we
both looked around uneasily at the padded walls. I think for a moment we could hear William Wharton -
not Billy the Kid, not him, he had been "Wild Bill" to us from his first day on the block - screaming and
laughing, telling us we were going to be damned glad to be rid of him, telling us we would never forgethim. About those things he was right.
As for what Brutal and I agreed on that night in the restraint room, it turned out just that way It was
almost as if we had taken a solemn oath on those tiny bits of colored, wood. Neither of us ever took part
in another execution. John Coffey was the last.

The Green Mile
Part Two:
The Mouse on the Mile
1.
The nursing home where I am crossing my last bunch of t's and dotting my last mess of i's is called
Georgia Pines. It's about sixty miles from Atlanta and about two hundred light-years from life as most
people - people under the age of eighty, let's say - live it. You who are reading this want to be careful that
there isn't a place like it waiting in your future. It's not a cruel place, not for the most part; there's cable
TV, the food's good (although there's damned little a man can chew), but in its way, it's as much of a
killing bottle as E Block at Cold Mountain ever was.
There's even a fellow here who reminds me a little of Percy Wetmore, who got his job on the Green Mile
because he was related to the governor of the state. I doubt if this fellow is related to anyone important,
even though he acts that way. Brad Dolan, his name is. He's always combing his hair, like Percy was, and
he's always got something to read stuffed into his back pocket. With Percy it was magazines like Argosy
and Men's Adventure; with Brad it's these little paperbacks called Gross jokes and Sick jokes. He's
always asking people why the Frenchman crossed the road or how many Polacks it takes to screw in a
lightbulb or how many pallbearers there are at a Harlem funeral. Like Percy, Brad is a dimwit who thinks
nothing is funny unless it's mean.
Something Brad said the other day struck me as actually smart, but I don't give him a lot of credit for it;
even a stopped clock is right twice a day, the proverb has it. "You're just lucky you don't have that
Alzheimer's disease, Paulie," was what he said. I hate him calling me that, Paulie, but he goes on doing it,
anyway; I've given up asking him to quit. There are other sayings - not quite proverbs - that apply to
Brad Dolan: "You can lead a horse to water but you can't make him drink" is one; "You can dress him up
but you can't take him out" is another. In his thickheadedness he is also like Percy.
When he made his comment about Alzheimer's, he was mopping the floor of the solarium, where I had
been going over the pages I have already written. There's a great lot of them, and I think there's apt to be
a great lot more before I am through. "That Alzheimer's, do you know what it really is?"
"No," I said, - but I'm sure you'll tell me, Brad."
"It's AIDS for old people," he said, and then burst out laughing, hucka-hucka-hucka-huck!, just like he
does over those idiotic jokes of his.I didn't laugh, though, because what he said struck a nerve somewhere. Not that I have Alzheimer's;
although there's plenty of it on view here at beautiful Georgia Pines, I myself just suffer the standard
oldguy memory problems. Those problems seem to have more to do with when than what. Looking over
what I have written so far, it occurs to me that I remember everything that happened back in '32; it's the
order of events that sometimes gets confused in my head. Yet, if I'm careful, I think I can keep even that
sorted out. More or less.
John Coffey came to E Block and the Green Mile in October of that year, condemned for the murder of
the nine-year-old Detterick twins. That's my major landmark, and if I keep it in view, I should do just
fine. William 'Wild Bill" Wharton came after Coffey; Delacroix came before. So did the mouse, the one
Brutus Howell - Brutal, to his friends - called Steamboat Willy and Delacroix ended up calling Mr.
Jingles.
Whatever you called him, the mouse came first, even before Del - it was still summer when he showed
up, and we had two other prisoners on the Green Mile: The Chief, Arlen Bitterbuck; and The Pres,
Arthur Flanders.
That mouse. That goddam mouse. Delacroix loved it, but Percy Wetmore sure didn't.
Percy hated it from the first.
2.
The mouse came back just about three days after Percy had chased it down the Green Mile that first time.
Dean Stanton and Bill Dodge were talking politics, which meant in those days, they were talking
Roosevelt and Hoover - Herbert, not J. Edgar. They were eating Ritz crackers from a box Dean had
purchased from old Toot-Toot an hour or so before. Percy was standing in the office doorway, practicing
quick draws with the baton he loved so much, as he listened. He'd pull it out of that ridiculous handtooled
holster he'd gotten somewhere, then twirl it (or try to; most times he would have dropped it if not for the
rawhide loop he kept on his wrist), then re-holster it. I was off that night, but got the full report from
Dean the following evening.
The mouse came up the Green Mile just as it had before, hopping along, then stopping and seeming to
check the empty cells. After a bit of that it would hop on, undiscouraged, as if it had known all along it
would be a long search, and it was up to that.
The President was awake this time, standing at his cell door. That guy was a piece of work, managing to
look natty even in his prison blues. We knew just by the way he looked that he wasn't made for Old
Sparky, and we were right - less than a week after Percy's second run at that mouse, The Pres's sentence
was commuted to life and he joined the general population.
"Say!" he called. ''There's a mouse in here! What kind of a joint are you guys running, anyway?" He was
kind of laughing, but Dean said he also sounded kind of outraged, as if even a murder rap hadn't been
quite enough to knock the Kiwanis out of his soul. He had been the regional head of an outfit called
Mid-South Realty Associates, and had thought himself smart enough to be able to get away with pushing
his half-senile father out a third-story window and collect on a double-indemnity whole-life policy. On
that he had been wrong, but maybe not by much.
"Shut up, you lugoon," Percy said, but that was pretty much automatic. He had his eye on the mouse. Hehad re-holstered his baton and taken out one of his magazines, but now he tossed the magazine on the
duty desk and pulled the baton out of its holster again. He began tapping it casually against the knuckles
of his left hand.
"Son of a bitch," Bill Dodge said. "I've never seen a mouse in here before."
"Aw, he's sort of cute," Dean said. "And not afraid at all."
"How do you know?"
"He was in the other night. Percy saw him, too. Brutal calls him Steamboat Willy."
Percy kind of sneered at that, but for the time being said nothing. He was tapping the baton faster now on
the back of his hand.
"Watch this," Dean said. "He came all the way up to the desk before. I want to see if he'll do it again."
It did, skirting wide of The Pres on its way, as if it didn't like the way our resident parricide smelled. It
checked two of the empty cells, even ran up onto one of the bare, unmattressed cots for a sniff, then came
back to the Green Mile. And Percy standing there the whole time, tapping and tapping, not talking for a
change, wanting to make it sorry for coming back. Wanting to teach it a lesson.
"Good thing you guys don't have to put him in Sparky," Bill said, interested in spite of himself. "You'd
have a hell of a time getting the clamps and the cap on."
Percy said nothing still, but he very slowly gripped the baton between his fingers, the way a man would
hold a good cigar.
The mouse stopped where it had before, no more than three feet from the duty desk, looking up at Dean
like a prisoner before the bar. It glanced up at Bill for a moment, then switched its attention back to
Dean. Percy it hardly seemed to notice at all.
"He's a brave little barstid, I got to give him that," Bill said. He raised his voice a little. "Hey! Hey!
Steamboat Willy!"
The mouse flinched a little and fluttered its ears, but it didn't run, or even show any signs of wanting to.
"Now watch this," Dean said, remembering how Brutal had fed it some of his corned-beef sandwich. "I
don't know if he'll do it again, but-"
He broke off a piece of Ritz cracker and dropped it in front of the mouse. It just looked with its sharp
black eyes at the orangey fragment for a second or two, its filament-fine whiskers twitching as it sniffed.
Then it reached out, took the cracker in its paws, sat up, and began to eat.
"Well. I'll be shucked and boiled!" Bill exclaimed. "Eats as neat as a parson on parish house Saturday
night!"
"Looks more like a nigger eating watermelon to me.". Percy remarked, but neither guard paid him any
mind. Neither did The Chief or The Pres, for that matter. The mouse finished the cracker but continued to
sit, seemingly balanced on the talented coil of its tail, looking up at the giants in blue.
"Lemme try," Bill said. He broke off another piece of cracker, leaned over the front of the desk, anddropped it carefully. The mouse sniffed but did not touch.
"Huh," Bill said. "Must be full."
"Nah," Dean said, "he knows you're a floater, that's all."
"Floater, am I? I like that! I'm here almost as much as Harry Terwilliger! Maybe more!"
"Simmer down, old-timer, simmer down," Dean said, grinning. "But watch and see if I'm not right." He
bombed another piece of cracker over the side. Sure enough, the mouse picked that one up and began to
eat again, still ignoring Bill Dodge's contribution completely. But before it had done more than take a
preliminary nibble or two, Percy threw his baton at it, launching it like a spear.
The mouse was a small target, and give the devil his due-it was a wickedly good shot, and might have
taken "Willy's" head clean off, if its reflexes hadn't been as sharp as shards of broken glass. It ducked -
yes, just as a human being would have - and dropped the chunk of cracker. The heavy hickory baton
passed over its head and spine close enough so its fur ruffled (that's what Dean said, anyway, and so I
pass it on, although I'm not sure I really believe it), then hit the green linoleum and bounced against the
bars of an empty cell. The mouse didn't wait to see if it was a mistake; apparently remembering a
pressing engagement elsewhere, it turned and was off down the corridor toward the restraint room in a
flash.
Percy roared with frustration - he knew how close he had come - and chased after it again. Bill Dodge
grabbed at his arm, probably out of simple instinct, but Percy pulled away from him. Still, Dean said, it
was probably that grab which saved Steamboat Willy's life, and it was still a near thing. Percy wanted not
just to kill the mouse but to squash it, so he ran in big, comical leaps, like a deer, stamping down with his
heavy black workshoes. The mouse barely avoided Percy's last two jumps, first zigging and then zagging.
It went under the door with a final flick of its long pink tail, and so long, stranger - it was gone.
"Fuck!" Percy said, and slammed the flat of his hand against the door. Then he began to sort through his
keys, meaning to go into the restraint room and continue the chase.
Dean came down the corridor after him, deliberately walking slow in order to get his emotions under
control. Part of him wanted to laugh at Percy, he told me, but part of him wanted to grab the man, whirl
him around, pin him against the restraint-room door, and whale the living daylights out of him. Most of
it, of course, was just being startled; our job on E Block was to keep rumpus to a minimum, and rumpus
was practically Percy Wetmore's middle name. Working with him was sort of like trying to defuse a
bomb with somebody standing behind you and every now and then clashing a pair of cymbals together.
In a word, upsetting. Dean said he could see that upset in Arlen Bitterbucks eyes ... even in The
President's eyes, although that gentleman was usually as cool as the storied cucumber.
And there was something else, as well. In some part of his mind, Dean had already begun to accept the
mouse as - well, maybe not as a friend, but as a part of life on the block. That made what Percy had done
and what he was trying to do not right. Not even if it was a mouse he was trying to do it to. And the fact
that Percy would never understand how come it wasn't right was pretty much the perfect example of why
he was all wrong for the job he thought he was doing.
By the time Dean reached the end of the corridor, he had gotten himself under control again, and knew
how he wanted to handle the matter. The one thing Percy absolutely couldn't stand was to look foolish,and we all knew it.
"Coises, foiled again," he said, grinning a little, kidding Percy along.Percy gave him an ugly look and flicked his hair off his brow. "Match your mouth, Four-Eyes. I'm riled.
Don't make it worse!"
"So it's moving day again, is it?" Dean said, not quite laughing ... but laughing with his eyes. "Well,
when you get everything out this time, would you mind mopping the floor?"
Percy looked at the door. Looked at his keys. Thought about another long, hot, fruitless rummage in the
room with the soft walls while they all stood around and watched him ... The Chief and The Pres, too.
"I'll be damned if I understand what's so funny," he said. "We don't need mice in the cellblock - we got
enough vermin in here already, without adding mice."
"Whatever you say, Percy," Dean said, holding up his hands. He had a moment right there, he told me the
next night, when he believed Percy might just take after him.
Bill Dodge strolled up then and smoothed it over. "Think you dropped this," he said, and handed Percy
his baton. "An inch lower, you woulda broken the little barstid's back."Percy's chest expanded at that. "Yeah, it wasn't a bad shot , " he said, carefully re-seating his
headknocker in its foolish holster. "I used to be a pitcher in high school. Threw two no-hitters."
"Is that right, now?" Bill said, and the respectful tone of voice (although he winked at Dean when Percy
turned away) was enough to finish defusing the situation.
"Yep," Percy said. "Threw one down in Knoxville. Those city boys didn't know what hit em. Walked
two. Could have had a perfect game if the ump hadn't been such a lugoon."
Dean could have left it at that, but he had seniority on Percy and part of a senior's job is to instruct, and at
that time - before Coffey, before Delacroix - he still thought Percy might be teachable. So he reached out
and grasped the younger man's wrist. "You want to think about what you was doing just now," Dean
said. His intention, he said later, was to sound serious but not disapproving. Not too disapproving,
anyway.
Except with Percy, that didn't work. He might not learn ... but we would eventually.
"Say, Four-Eyes, I know what I was doing - trying to get that mouse! What're you, blind?"
"You also scared the cheese out of Bill, out of me, and out of them," Dean said, pointing in the direction
of Bitterbuck and Flanders.
"So what?" Percy asked, drawing himself up. "They ain't in cradle-school, in case you didn't notice.
Although you guys treat them that way half the time."
"Well, I don't like to be scared," Bill rumbled, "and I work here, Wetmore, in case you didn't notice. I
ain't one of your lugoons."
Percy gave him a look that was narrow-eyed and a touch uncertain."And we don't scare them any more than we have to, because they're under a lot of strain," Dean said. He
was still keeping his voice low. "Men that are under a lot of strain can snap. Hurt themselves. Hurt
others. Sometimes get folks like us in trouble, too."
Percy's mouth twitched at that. "In trouble" was an idea that had power over him. Making trouble was
okay. Getting into it was not.
"Our job is talking, not yelling," Dean said. "A man who is yelling at prisoners is a man who has lost
control."
Percy knew who had written that scripture - me.
The boss. There was no love lost between Percy Wetmore and Paul Edgecombe, and this was still
summer, remember - long before the real festivities started.
"You'll do better," Dean said, "if you think of this place as like an intensive-care ward in a hospital. It's
best to be quiet--!"
"I think of it as a bucket of piss to drown rats in," Percy said, "and that's all. Now let me go."
He tore free of Dean's hand, stepped between him and Bill, and stalked up the corridor with his head
down. He walked a little too close to The President's side - close enough so that Flanders could have
reached out, grabbed him, and maybe headwhipped him with his own prized hickory baton, had Flanders
been that sort of man. He wasn't, of course, but The Chief perhaps was. The Chief, if given a chance,
might have administered such a beating just to teach Percy a lesson. What Dean said to me on that
subject when he told me this story the following night has stuck with me ever since, because it turned out
to be a kind of prophecy. "Wetmore don't understand that he hasn't got any power over them," Dean said.
"That nothing he does can really make things worse for them, that they can only be electrocuted once.
Until he gets his head around that, he's going to be a danger to himself and to everyone else down here."
Percy went into my office and slammed the door behind him.
"My, my," Bill Dodge said. "Ain't he the swollen and badly infected testicle."
"You don't know the half of it," Dean said.
"Oh, look on the bright side," Bill said. He was always telling people to look on the bright side; it got so
you wanted to punch his nose every time it came out of his mouth. "Your trick mouse got away, at least."
"Yeah, but we won't see him no more," Dean said. "I imagine this time goddam Percy Wetmore's scared
him off for good."
3.
That was logical but wrong. The mouse was back the very next evening, which just happened to be the
first of Percy Wetmore's two nights off before he slid over to the graveyard shift.
Steamboat Willy showed up around seven o'clock. I was there to see his reappearance; so was Dean.
Harry Terwilliger, too. Harry was on the desk. I was technically on days, but had stuck around to spend
an extra hour with The Chief, whose time was getting close by then. Bitterbuck was stoical on the
outside, in the tradition of his tribe, but I could see his fear of the end growing inside him like a poisonflower. So we talked. You could talk to them in the daytime but it wasn't so good, with the shouts and
conversation (not to mention the occasional fist-fight) coming from the exercise yard, the
chonk-chonk-chonk of the stamping machines in the plate-shop, the occasional yell of a guard for
someone to put down that pick or grab up that hoe or just to get your ass over here, Harvey. After four it
got a little better, and after six it got better still. Six to eight was the optimum time. After that you could
see the long thoughts starting to steal over their minds again - in their eyes you could see it, like
afternoon shadows and it was best to stop. They still heard what you were saying, but it no longer made
sense to them. Past eight they were getting ready for the watches of the night and imagining how the cap
would feel when it was clamped to the tops of their heads, and how the air would smell inside the black
bag which had been rolled down over their sweaty faces.
But I got The Chief at a good time. He told me about his first wife, and how they had built a lodge
together up in Montana. Those had been the happiest days of his life, he said. The water was so pure and
so cold that it felt like your mouth was cut every time you drank.
"Hey, Mr. Edgecombe," he said. "You think, if a man he sincerely repent of what he done wrong, he
might get to go back to the time that was happiest for him and live there forever? Could that be what
heaven is like?"
"I've just about believed that very thing," I said, which was a he I didn't regret in the least. I had learned
of matters eternal at my mother's pretty knee, and what I believed is what the Good Book says about
murderers: that there is no eternal life in them. I think they go straight to hell, where they burn in torment
until God finally gives Gabriel the nod to blow the Judgment Trump. When he does, they'll wink out ...
and probably glad to go they will be. But I never gave a hint of such beliefs to Bitterbuck, or to any of
them. I think in their hearts they knew it. Where is your brother, his blood crieth to me from the ground,
God said to Cain, and I doubt if the words were much of a surprise to that particular problem-child; I bet
he heard Abel's blood whining out of the earth at him with each step he took.
The Chief was smiling when I left, perhaps thinking about his lodge in Montana and his wife lying
bare-breasted in the light of the fire. He would be walking in a warmer fire soon, I had no doubt.
I went back up the corridor, and Dean told me about his set-to with Percy the previous night. I think he'd
waited around just so he could, and I listened carefully. I always listened carefully when the subject was
Percy, because I agreed with Dean a hundred per cent - I thought Percy was the sort of man who could
cause a lot of trouble, as much for the rest of us as for himself.
As Dean was finishing, old Toot-Toot came by with his red snack-wagon, which was covered with
handlettered Bible quotes ("REPENT for the LORD shall judge his people," Deut. 32:36, "And surely
your BLOOD of your lives will I require," Gen. 9:5, and similar cheery, uplifting sentiments), and sold
us some sandwiches and pops. Dean was hunting for change in his pocket and saying that we wouldn't
see Steamboat Willy anymore, that goddam Percy Wetmore had scared him off for good, when old
Toot-Toot said, 'What's that'ere, then?"
We looked, and here came the mouse of the hour his ownself, hopping up the middle of the Green Mile.
He'd come a little way; then stop, look around with his bright little oildrop eyes, then come on again.
"Hey, mouse!" The Chief said, and the mouse stopped and looked at him, whiskers twitching. I tell you,
it was exactly as if the damned thing knew it had been called. "You some kind of spirit guide?"Bitterbuck tossed the mouse a little morsel of cheese from his supper. It landed right in front of the
mouse, but Steamboat Willy hardly even glanced at it, just came on his way again, up the Green Mile,
looking in empty cells.
"Boss Edgecombe!" The. President called. "Do you think that little bastard knows Wetmore isn't here? I
do, by God!"
I felt about the same ... but I wasn't going to say so out loud.
Harry came out into the hall, hitching up his pants the way he always did after he'd spent a refreshing few
minutes in the can, and stood there with his eyes wide. Toot-Toot was also staring, a sunken grin doing
unpleasant things to the soft and toothless lower half of his face.
The mouse stopped in what was becoming its usual spot, curled its tail around its paws, and looked at us.
Again I was reminded of pictures I had seen of judges passing sentence on hapless prisoners ... yet, had
there ever been a prisoner as small and unafraid as this one? Not that it really was a prisoner, of course; it
could come and go pretty much as it pleased. Yet the idea would not leave my mind, and it again
occurred to me that most of us would feel that small when approaching God's judgment seat after our
lives were over, but very few of us would be able to look so unafraid."Well, I swear," Old Toot-Toot said. "There he sits, big as Billy-Be-Frigged."
"You ain't seen nothing yet, Toot," Harry said. "atch this." He reached into his breast pocket and came
out with a slice of cinnamon apple wrapped in waxed paper. He broke off the end and tossed it on the
floor. It was dry and hard and I thought it would bounce right past the mouse, but it reached out one paw,
as carelessly as a man swatting at a fly to pass the time, and batted it flat. We all laughed in admiration
and surprise, an outburst of sound that should have sent the mouse skittering, but it barely twitched. It
picked up the piece of dried apple in its paws, gave it a couple of licks, then dropped it and looked up at
us as if to say, Not bad, what else do you have?
Toot-Toot opened his cart, took out a sandwich, unwrapped it, and tore off a scrap of bologna.
"Don't bother," Dean said.
'What do you mean?" Toot-Toot asked. "Ain't a mouse alive'd pass up bologna if he could get it. You a
crazy guy!"
But I knew Dean was right, and I could see by Harry's face that he knew it, too. There were floaters and
there were regulars. Somehow, that mouse seemed to know the difference. Nuts, but true.
Old Toot-Toot tossed the scrap of bologna down, and sure enough, the mouse wouldn't have a thing to do
with it; sniffed it once and then backed off a pace.
"I'll be a goddamned son of a bitch," Old Toot-Toot said, sounding offended.
I held out my hand. "Give it to me."
"What - same sammitch?"
"Same one. I'll pay for it."
Toot-Toot handed it over. I lifted the top slice of bread, tore off another sliver of meat, and dropped itover the front of the duty desk. The mouse came forward at once. picked it up in its paws, and began toeat. The bologna was gone before you could say Jack Robinson.
"I'll be goddamned!" Toot-Toot cried. "Bloody hell! Gimme dat!"
He snatched back the sandwich, tore off a much larger piece of meat - not a scrap this time but a flap -
and dropped it so close to the mouse that Steamboat Willy almost ended up wearing it for a hat. It drew
back again, sniffed (surely no mouse ever hit such a jackpot during the Depression - not in our state, at
least), and then looked up at us.
"Go on, eat it!" Toot-Toot said, sounding more offended than ever. "What's wrong witchoo?"
Dean took the sandwich and dropped a piece of meat - by then it was like some strange communion
service. The mouse picked it up at once and bolted it down. Then it turned and went back down the
corridor to the restraint room, pausing along the way to peer into a couple of empty cells and to take a
brief investigatory tour of a third. Once again the idea that it was looking for someone occurred to me,
and this time I dismissed the thought more slowly.
"I'm not going to talk about this," Harry said. He sounded as if he was half-joking, half-not. "First of all,
nobody'd care. Second, they wouldn't believe me if they did."
"He only ate from you fellas," Toot-Toot said. He shook his head in disbelief, then bent laboriously over,
picked up what the mouse had disdained, and popped it into his own toothless maw, where he be gan the
job of gumming it into submission. "Now why he do dat?"
"I've got a better one," Harry said. "How'd he know Percy was off?"
"He didn't," I said. "It was just coincidence, that mouse showing up tonight."
Except that got harder and harder to believe as the days went by and the mouse showed up only when
Percy was off, on another shift, or in another part of the prison. We - Harry, Dean, Brutal, and me -
decided that it must know Percy's voice, or his smell.
We carefully avoided too much discussion about the mouse itself - himself. That, we seemed to have
decided without saying a word, might go a long way toward spoiling something that was special, and
beautiful, by virtue of its strangeness and delicacy. Willy had chosen us, after all, in some way I do not
understand, even now. Maybe Harry came closest when he said it would do no good to tell other people,
not just because they wouldn't believe but because they wouldn't care.4.
Then it was time for the execution of Arlen Bitterbuck, in reality no chief but first elder of his tribe on
the Washita Reservation, and a member of the Cherokee Council as well. He had killed a man while
drunk - while both of them were drunk, in fact. The Chief had crushed the man's head with a cement
block. At issue had been a pair of boots. So, on July seventeenth of that rainy summer, my council of
elders intended for his life to end.
Visiting hours for most Cold Mountain prisoners were as rigid as steel beams, but that didn't hold for our
boys on E Block. So, on the sixteenth, Bitterbuck was allowed over to the long room adjacent to the
cafeteria - the Arcade. It was divided straight down the middle by mesh interwoven with strands ofbarbed wire. Here The Chief would visit with his second wife and those of his children who would still
treat with him. It was time for the good-byes.
He was taken over there by Bill Dodge and two other floaters. The rest of us had work to do - one hour to
cram in at least two rehearsals. Three, if we could manage it.
Percy didn't make much protest over being put in the switch room with Jack Van Hay for the Bitterbuck
electrocution; he was too green to know if he was being given a good spot or a bad one. What he did
know was that he had a rectangular mesh window to look through, and although he probably didn't care
to be looking at the back of the chair instead of the front, he would still be close enough to see the sparks
flying.
Right outside that window was a black wall telephone with no crank or dial on it. That phone could only
ring in, and only from one place: the governor's office. I've seen lots of jailhouse movies over the years
where the official phone rings just as they're getting ready to pull the switch on some poor innocent sap,
but ours never rang during all my years on E Block, never once. In the movies, salvation is cheap. So is
innocence. You pay a quarter, and a quarter's worth is just what you get. Real life costs more, and most
of the answers are different.
We had a tailor's dummy down in the tunnel for the run to the meatwagon, and we had Old Toot-Toot for
the rest. Over the years, Toot had somehow become the traditional stand-in for the condemned, as
time-honored in his way as the goose you sit down to on Christmas, whether you like goose or not. Most
of the other screws liked him, were amused by his funny accent - also French, but Canadian rather than
Cajun, and softened into its own thing by his years of incarceration in the South. Even Brutal got a kick
out of Old Toot. Not me, though. I thought he was, in his way, an older and dimmer version of Percy
Wetmore, a man too squeamish to kill and cook his own meat but who did, all the same, just love the
smell of a barbecue.
We were all there for the rehearsal, just as we would all be there for the main event. Brutus Howell had
been "put out," as we said, which meant that he would place the cap, monitor the governor's phoneline,
summon the doctor from his place by the wall if he was needed, and give the actual order to roll on two
when the time came. If it went well, there would be no credit for anyone. If it didn't go well, Brutal
would be blamed by the witnesses and I would be blamed by the warden. Neither of us complained about
this; it wouldn't have done any good. The world turns, that's all. You can hold on and turn with it, or
stand up to protest and be spun right off.
Dean, Harry Terwilliger, and I walked down to The Chief's cell for the first rehearsal not three minutes
after Bill and his troops had escorted Bitterbuck off the block and over to the Arcade. The cell door was
open, and Old Toot-Toot sat on The Chief's bunk, his wispy white hair flying.
"There come-stains all over dis sheet," Toot-Toot remarked. "He mus' be tryin to get rid of it before you
fellas boil it off!" And he cackled.
"Shut up, Toot," Dean said. "Let's play this serious."
"Okay," Toot-Toot said, immediately composing his face into an expression of thunderous gravity. But
his eyes twinkled. Old Toot never looked so alive as when he was playing dead.
I stepped forward. "Arlen Bitterbuck, as an officer of the court and of the state of blah-blah, I have awarrant for blah-blah, such execution to be carried out at twelve-oh-one on blah-blah, will you step
forward?"
Toot got off the bunk. "I'm steppin forward, I'm steppin forward, I'm steppin forward," he said.
"Turn around," Dean said, and when Toot-Toot turned, Dean examined the dandruffy top of his head.
The crown of The Chief's head would be shaved tomorrow night, and Dean's check then would be to
make sure he didn't need a touch-up. Stubble could impede conduction, make things harder. Everything
we were doing today was about making things easier.
"All right, Arlen, let's go," I said to Toot-Toot, and away we went.
"I'm walkin down the corridor, I'm walkin down the corridor, I'm walkin down the corridor," Toot said. I
flanked him on the left, Dean on the right. Harry was directly behind him. At the head of the corridor we
turned right, away from life as it was lived in the exercise yard and toward death as it was died in the
storage room. We went into my office, and Toot dropped to his knees without having to be asked. He
knew the script, all right, probably better than any of us. God knew he'd been there longer than any of us.
"I'm prayin, I'm prayin, I'm prayin," Toot-Toot said, holding his gnarled hands up. They looked like that
famous engraving, you probably know the one I mean. "The Lord is my shepherd, so on 'n so forth."
"Who's Bitterbuck got?" Harry asked. "We're not going to have some Cherokee medicine man in here
shaking his dick, are we?"
"Actually - "
"Still prayin, still prayin, still gettin right with Jesus," Toot overrode me.
"Shut up, you old gink," Dean said.
"I'm prayin!"
"Then pray to yourself."
"What's keepin you guys?" Brutal hollered in from the storage room. That had also been emptied for our
use. We were in the killing zone again, all right; it was a thing you could almost smell.
"Hold your friggin water!" Harry yelled back. "Don't be so goddam impatient!"
"Prayin," Toot said, grinning his unpleasant sunken grin. "Prayin for patience, just a little goddam
patience."
"Actually, Bitterbuck's a Christian - he says," I told them, "and he's perfectly happy with the Baptist guy
who came for Tillman Clark. Schuster, his name is. I like him, too. He's fast, and he doesn't get them all
worked up. On your feet, Toot. You prayed enough for one day."
"Walkin," Toot said. "Walkin again, walkin again, yes sir, walkin on the Green Mile."
Short as he was, he still had to duck a little to get through the door on the far side of the office. The rest
of us had to duck even more. This was a vulnerable time with a real prisoner, and when I looked across
to the platform where Old Sparky stood and saw Brutal with his gun drawn, I nodded with satisfaction.
Just right.Toot-Toot went down the steps and stopped. The folding wooden chairs, about forty of them, were
already in place. Bitterbuck would cross to the platform on an angle that would keep him safely away
from the seated spectators, and half a dozen guards would be added for insurance. Bill Dodge would be
in charge of those. We had never had a witness menaced by a condemned prisoner in spite of what was,
admittedly, a raw set-up, and that was how I meant to keep it.
"Ready, boys?" Toot asked when we were back in our original formation at the foot of the stairs leading
down from my office. I nodded, and we walked to the platform. What we looked like more than
anything, I often thought, was a color-guard that had forgotten its flag.
"What am I supposed to do?" Percy called from behind the wire mesh between the storage room and the
switch room.
"Watch and learn," I called back.
"And keep yer hands off yer wiener," Harry muttered. Toot-Toot heard him, though, and cackled.
We escorted him up onto the platform and Toot turned around on his own - the old vet in action. "Sittin
down," he said, "sittin down. sittin down, takin a seat in Old Sparky's lap."
I dropped to my right knee before his right leg. Dean dropped to his left knee before his left leg. It was at
this point we ourselves would be most vulnerable to physical attack, should the condemned man go
berserk, which, every now and then, they did. We both turned the cocked knee slightly inward, to protect
the crotch area. We dropped our chins to protect our throats. And, of course, we moved to secure the
ankles and neutralize the danger as fast as we could. The Chief would be wearing slippers when he took
his final promenade, but "it could have been worse" isn't much comfort to a man with a ruptured larynx.
Or writhing on the floor with his balls swelling up to the size of Mason jars, for that matter, while forty
or so spectators - many of them gentlemen of the press - sit in those Grange-hall chairs, watching the
whole thing.
We clamped Toot-Toot's ankles. The clamp on Dean's side was slightly bigger, because it carried the
juice. When Bitterbuck sat down tomorrow night, he would do so with a shaved left calf. Indians have
very little body-hair as a rule, but we would take no chances.
While we were clamping Toot-Toots ankles, Brutal secured his right wrist. Harry stepped smoothly
forward and clamped the left. When they were done, Harry nodded to Brutal, and Brutal called back to
Van Hay: "Roll on one!"
I heard Percy asking Jack Van Hay what that meant (it was hard to believe how little he knew, how little
he'd picked up during his time on E Block) and Van Hay's murmur of explanation. Today Roll on one
meant nothing, but when he heard Brutal say it tomorrow night, Van Hay would turn the knob that
goosed the prison generator behind B Block. The witnesses would hear the genny as a steady low
humming, and the lights all over the prison would brighten. In the other cellblocks, prisoners would
observe those overbright lights and think it had happened, the execution was over, when in fact it was
just beginning.
Brutal stepped around the chair so that Toot could see him. "Arlen Bitterbuck, you have been condemned
to die in the electric chair, sentence passed by a jury of your peers and imposed by a judge in good
standing in this state. God save the people of this state. Do you have anything to say before sentence iscarried out?"
"Yeah," Toot said, eyes gleaming, lips bunched in a toothless happy grin. "I want a fried chicken dinner
with gravy on the taters, I want to shit in your hat, and I got to have Mae West sit on my face, because I
am one horny motherfucker."
Brutal tried to hold onto his stem expression, but it was impossible. He threw back his head and began
laughing. Dean collapsed onto the edge of the platform like he'd been gutshot, head down between his
knees, howling like a coyote, with one hand clapped to his brow as if to keep his brains in there where
they belonged. Harry was knocking his own head against the wall and going huh-huh-huh as if he had a
glob of food stuck in his throat. Even Jack Van Hay, a man not known for his sense of humor, was
laughing. I felt like it myself, of course I did, but controlled it somehow. Tomorrow night it was going to
be for real, and a man would die there where Toot-Toot was sitting.
"Shut up, Brutal," I said. "You too, Dean. Harry and Toot, the next remark like that to come out of your
mouth will be your last. I'll have Van Hay roll on two for real."
Toot gave me a grin as if to say that was a good 'un, Boss Edgecombe, a real good 'un. It faltered into a
narrow, puzzled look when he saw I wasn't answering it. "What's wrong witchoo?" he asked.
"It's not funny," I said. "That's what's wrong with me, and if you're not smart enough to get it, you better
just keep your gob shut." Except it was funny, in its way, and I suppose that was what had really made
me mad.
I looked around, saw Brutal staring at me, still grinning a little.
"Shit," I said, "I'm getting too old for this job."
"Nah," Brutal said. "You're in your prime, Paul." But I wasn't, neither was he, not as far as this goddam
job went, and both of us knew it. Still, the important thing was that the laughing fit had passed. That was
good, because the last thing I wanted was somebody remembering Toot's smart-aleck remark tomorrow
night and getting going again. You'd say such a thing would be impossible, a guard laughing his ass off
as he escorted a condemned man past the witnesses to the electric chair, but when men are under stress,
anything can happen. And a thing like that, people would have talked about it for twenty years.
"Are you going to be quiet, Toot?" I asked.
"Yes," he said, his averted face that of the world's oldest, poutiest child.
I nodded to Brutal that he should get on with the rehearsal. He took the mask from the brass hook on the
back of the chair and rolled it down over Toot Toot's head, pulling it snug under his chin, which opened
the hole at the top to its widest diameter. Then Brutal leaned over, picked the wet circle of sponge out of
the bucket, pressed one finger against it, then licked the tip of the finger. That done, he put the sponge
back in the bucket. Tomorrow he wouldn't. Tomorrow he would tuck it into the cap perched on the back
of the chair. Not today, though; there was no need to get Toot's old head wet.
The cap was steel, and with the straps dangling down on either side, it looked sort of like a dough boy's
helmet. Brutal put it on Old Toot-Toot's head, snugging it down over the hole in the black headcovering.
"Gettin the cap. gettin the cap, gettin the cap," Toot said, and now his voice sounded squeezed as well asmuffled. The straps held his jaw almost closed, and I suspected Brutal had snugged it down a little tighter
than he strictly had to for purposes of rehearsal. He stepped back, faced the empty seats, and said: "Arlen
Bitterbuck, electricity shall now be passed through your body until you are dead, in accordance with state
law. May God have mercy on your soul."
Brutal turned to the mesh-covered rectangle. "Roll on two."
Old Toot, perhaps trying to recapture his earlier flare of comic genius, began to buck and flail in the
chair, as Old Sparky's actual customers almost never did. "Now I'm fryin!" he cried. "Fryin! Fryyyin!
Geeeaah! I'm a done tom turkey!"
Harry and Dean, I saw, were not watching this at all. They had turned away from Sparky and were
looking across the empty storage room at the door leading back into my office. "Well, I'll be
goddamned," Harry said. "One of the witnesses came a day early."
Sitting in the doorway with its tail curled neatly around its paws, watching with its beady black oilspot
eyes, was the mouse.
5.
The execution went well - if there was ever such a thing as "a good one" (a proposition I strongly doubt),
then the execution of Arlen Bitterbuck, council elder of the Washita Cherokee, was it. He got his braids
wrong - his hands were shaking too badly to make a good job of it - and his eldest daughter, a woman of
thirty-odd, was allowed to plait them nice and even. She wanted to weave feathers in at the tips, the
pinfeathers of a hawk, his bird, but I couldn't allow it. They might catch fire and burn. I didn't tell her
that, of course, just said it was against regulations. She made no protest, only bowed her head and put her
hands to her temples to show her disappointment and her disapproval. She conducted herself with great
dignity, that woman, and by doing so practically guaranteed that her father would do the same.
The Chief left his cell with no protest or holding back when the time came. Sometimes we had to pry
their fingers off the bars - I broke one or two in my time and have never forgotten the muffled snapping
sound - but The Chief wasn't one of those, thank God. He walked strong up the Green Mile to my office,
and there he dropped to his knees to pray with Brother Schuster, who had driven down from the
Heavenly Light Baptist Church in his flivver. Schuster gave The Chief a few psalms, and The Chief
started to cry when Schuster got to the one about lying down beside the still waters. It wasn't bad,
though, no hysteria, nothing like that. I had an idea he was thinking about still water so pure and so cold
it felt like it was cutting your mouth every time you drank some.
Actually, I like to see them cry a little. It's when they don't that I get worried.
A lot of men can't get up from their knees again without help, but The Chief did okay in that department.
He swayed a little at first, like he was lightheaded, and Dean put out a hand to steady him, but Bitterbuck
had already found his balance again on his own, so out we went.
Almost all the chairs were occupied, with the people in them murmuring quietly among themselves, like
folks do when they're waiting for a wedding or a funeral to get started. That was the only time Bitterbuck
faltered. I don't know if it was any one person in particular that bothered him, or all of them together, but
I could hear a low moaning start up in his throat, and all at once the arm I was holding had a drag in it
that hadn't been there before. Out of the corner of my eye I could see Harry Terwilliger moving up to cutoff The Chief's retreat if Bitterbuck all at once decided he wanted to go hard.
I tightened my grip on his elbow and tapped the inside of his arm with one finger. "Steady, Chief," I said
out of the corner of my mouth, not moving my lips. "The only thing most of these people will remember
about you is how you go out, so give them something good - show them how a Washita does it."
He glanced at me sideways and gave a little nod. Then he took one of the braids his daughter had made
and kissed it. I looked to Brutal, standing at parade rest behind the chair, resplendent in his best blue
uniform, all the buttons on the tunic polished and gleaming, his hat sitting square-john perfect on his big
head. I gave him a little nod and he shot it right back, stepping forward to help Bitterbuck mount the
platform if he needed help. Turned out he didn't.
It was less than a minute from the time Bitterbuck sat down in the chair to the moment when Brutal
,called "Roll on two!" softly back over his shoulder. The lights dimmed down again, but only a little; you
wouldn't have noticed it if you hadn't been looking for it. That meant Van Hay had pulled the switch
some wit had labeled MABEL'S HAIR DRIER. There was a low humming from the cap, and Bitterbuck
surged forward against the clamps and the restraining belt across his chest. Over against the wall, the
prison doctor watched expressionlessly, lips thinned until his mouth looked like a single white stitch.
There was no flopping and flailing, such as Old Toot-Toot had done at rehearsal, only that powerful
forward surge, as a man may surge forward from the hips while in the grip of a powerful orgasm. The
Chief's blue shirt pulled tight at the buttons, creating little strained smiles of flesh between them.
And there was a smell. Not bad in itself, but unpleasant in its associations. I've never been able to go
down in the cellar at my granddaughter's house when they bring me there, although that's where their
little boy has his Lionel set-up, which he would dearly love to share with his great-grampa. I don't mind
the trains, as I'm sure you can guess - it's the transformer I can't abide. The way it hums. And the way,
when it gets hot, it smells. Even after all these years, that smell reminds me of Cold Mountain.
Van Hay gave him thirty seconds, then turned the juice off. The doctor stepped forward from his place
and listened with his stethoscope. There was no talk from the witnesses now. The doctor straightened up
and looked through the mesh. "Disorganized," he said, and made a twirling, cranking gesture with one
finger. He had heard a few random heartbeats from Bitterbuck's chest, probably as meaningless as the
final jitters of a decapitated chicken, but it was better not to take chances. You didn't want him suddenly
sitting up on the gurney when you had him halfway through the tunnel, bawling that he felt like he was
on fire.
Van Hay rolled on three and The Chief surged forward again, twisting a little from side to side in the grip
of the current. When doc listened this time, he nodded. It was over. We had once again succeeded in
destroying what we could not create. Some of the folks in the audience had begun talking in those low
voices again; most sat with their heads down, looking at the floor, as if stunned. Or ashamed.
Harry and Dean came up with the stretcher. It was actually Percy's job to take one end, but he didn't
know and no one had bothered to tell him. The Chief, still wearing the black silk hood, was loaded onto
it by Brutal and me, and we whisked him through the door which led to the tunnel as fast as we could
manage it without actually running. Smoke - too much of it - was rising from the hole in the top of the
mask, and there was a horrible stench.
"Aw, man!" Percy cried, his voice wavering. 'What's that smell?""Just get out of my way and stay out of it," Brutal said, shoving past him to get to the wall where there
was a mounted fire extinguisher. It was one of the old chemical kind that you had to pump. Dean,
meanwhile, had stripped off the hood. It wasn't as bad as it could have been; Bitterbuck's left braid was
smouldering like a pile of wet leaves.
"Never mind that thing," I told Brutal. I didn't want to have to clean a load of chemical slime off the dead
man's face before putting him in the back of the meatwagon. I slapped at The Chief's head (Percy staring
at me, wide-eyed, the whole time) until the smoke quit rising. Then we carried the body down the twelve
wooden steps to the tunnel. Here it was as chilly and dank as a dungeon, with the hollow plink-plink
sound of dripping water. Hanging lights with crude tin shades - they were made in the prison
machine-shop - showed a brick tube that ran thirty feet under the highway. The top was curved and wet.
It made me feel like a character in an Edgar Allan Poe story every time I used it.
There was a gurney waiting. We loaded Bitterbuck's body onto it, and I made a final check to make sure
his hair was out. That one braid was pretty well charred, and I was sorry to see that the cunning little bow
on that side of his head was now nothing but a blackened lump.
Percy slapped the dead man's cheek. The flat smacking sound of his hand made us all jump. Percy looked
around at us with a cocky smile on his mouth, eyes glittering. Then he looked back at Bitterbuck again.
"Adios, Chief," he said. "Hope hell's hot enough for you."
"Don't do that," Brutal said, his voice hollow and declamatory in the dripping tunnel. "He's paid what he
owed. He's square with the house again. You keep your hands off him."
"Aw, blow it out," Percy said, but he stepped back uneasily when Brutal moved toward him, shadow
rising behind him like the shadow of that ape in the story about the Rue Morgue. But instead of grabbing
at Percy, Brutal grabbed hold of the gurney and began pushing Arlen Bitterbuck slowly toward the far
end of the tunnel, where his last ride was waiting, parked on the soft shoulder of the highway. The
gurney's hard rubber wheels moaned on the boards; its shadow rode the bulging brick wall, waxing and
waning; Dean and Harry grasped the sheet at the foot and pulled it up over The Chief's face, which had
already begun to take on the waxy, characterless cast of all dead faces, the innocent as well as the guilty.
6.
When I was eighteen, my Uncle Paul - the man I was named for - died of a heart attack. My mother and
dad took me to Chicago with them to attend his funeral and visit relatives from my father's side of the
family, many of whom I had never met. We were gone almost a month. In some ways that was a good
trip, a necessary and exciting trip, but in another way it was horrible. I was deeply in love, you see, with
the young woman who was to become my wife two weeks after my nineteenth birthday. One night when
my longing for her was like a fire burning out of control in my heart and my head (oh yes, all right, and
in my balls, as well), I wrote her a letter that just seemed to go on and on - I poured out my whole heart
in it, never looking back to see what I'd said because I was afraid cowardice would make me stop. I didn't
stop, and when a voice in my head clamored that it would be madness to mail such a letter, that I would
be giving her my naked heart to hold in her hand, I ignored it with a child's breathless disregard of the
consequences. I often wondered if Janice kept that letter, but never quite got up enough courage to ask.
All I know for sure is that I did not find it when I went through her things after the funeral, and of course
that by itself means nothing. I suppose I never asked because I was afraid of discovering that burning
epistle meant less to her than it did to me.It was four pages long, I thought I would never write anything longer in my life, and now look at this. All
this, and the end still not in sight. If I'd known the story was going to go on this long, I might never have
started. What I didn't realize was how many doors the act of writing unlocks, as if my Dad's old fountain
pen wasn't really a pen at all, but some strange variety of skeleton key. The mouse is probably the best
example of what I'm talking about - Steamboat Willy, Mr. Jingles, the mouse on the Mile. Until I started
to write, I never realized how important he (yes, he) was. The way he seemed to be looking for Delacroix
before Delacroix arrived, for instance - I don't think that ever occurred to me, not to my conscious mind,
anyway, until I began to write and remember.
I guess what I'm saying is that I didn't realize how far back I'd have to go in order to tell you about John
Coffey, or how long I'd have to leave him there in his cell, a man so huge his feet didn't just stick off the
end of his bunk but hung down all the way to the floor. I don't want you to forget him, all right? I want
you to see him there, looking up at the ceiling of his cell, weeping his silent tears, or putting his arms
over his face. I want you to hear him, his sighs that trembled like sobs, his occasional watery groan.
These weren't the sounds of agony and regret we sometimes heard on E Block, sharp cries with splinters
of remorse in them; like his wet eyes, they were somehow removed from the pain we were used to
dealing with. In a way - I know how crazy this will sound, of course I do, but there is no sense in writing
something as long as this if you can't say what feels true to your heart - in a way it was as if it was sorrow
for the whole world he felt, something too big ever to be completely eased. Sometimes I sat and talked to
him, as I did with all of them - talking was our biggest, most important job, as I believe I have said - and
I tried to comfort him. I don't feel that I ever did, and part of my heart was glad he was suffering, you
know. Felt he deserved to suffer. I even thought sometimes of calling the governor (or getting Percy to
do it - hell, he was Percy's damn uncle, not mine) and asking for a stay of execution. We shouldn't burn
him yet, I'd say It's still hurting him too much, biting into him too much, twisting in his guts like a nice
sharp stick. Give him another ninety days, your honor, sir. Let him go on doing to himself what we can't
do to him.
It's that John Coffey I'd have you keep to one side of your mind while I finish catching up to where I
started - that John Coffey lying on his bunk, that John Coffey who was afraid of the dark perhaps with
good reason, for in the dark might not two shapes with blonde curls - no longer little girls but avenging
harpies - be waiting for him? That John Coffey whose eyes were always streaming tears, like blood from
a wound that can never heal.
7.
So The Chief burned and The President walked - as far as C Block, anyway, which was home to most of
Cold Mountain's hundred and fifty lifers. Life for The Pres turned out to be twelve years. He was
drowned in the prison laundry in 1944. Not the Cold Mountain prison laundry; Cold Mountain closed in
1933. I don't suppose it mattered much to the inmates - wars is walls, as the cons say, and Old Sparky
was every bit as lethal in his own little stone death chamber, I reckon, as he'd ever been in the storage
room at Cold Mountain.
As for The Pres, someone shoved him face-first into a vat of dry-cleaning fluid and held him there. When
the guards pulled him out again, his face was almost entirely gone. They had to ID him by his
fingerprints. On the whole, he might have been better off with Old Sparky ... but then he never would
have had those extra twelve years, would he? I doubt he thought much about them, though, in the last
minute or so of his life, when his lungs were trying to learn how to breathe Hexlite and lye cleanser.They never caught whoever did for him. By then I was out of the corrections line of work, but Harry
Terwilliger wrote and told me. "He got commuted mostly because he was white," Harry wrote, "but he
got it in the end, just the same. I just think of it as a long stay of execution that finally ran out."
There was a quiet time for us in E Block, once The Pres was gone. Harry and Dean were temporarily
reassigned, and it was just me, Brutal, and Percy on the Green Mile for a little bit. Which actually meant
just me and Brutal, because Percy kept pretty much to himself. I tell you, that young man was a genius at
finding things not to do. And every so often (but only when Percy wasn't around), the other guys would
show up to have what Harry liked to call "a good gab." On many of these occasions the mouse would
also show up. We'd feed him and he'd sit there eating, just as solemn as Solomon, watching us with his
bright little oilspot eyes.
That was a good few weeks, calm and easy even with Percy's more than occasional carping. But all good
things come to an end, and on a rainy Monday in late July - have I told you how rainy and dank that
summer was? - I found myself sitting on the bunk of an open cell and waiting for Eduard Delacroix.
He came with an unexpected bang. The door leading into the exercise yard slammed open, letting in a
flood of light, there was a confused rattle of chains, a frightened voice babbling away in a mixture of
English and Cajun French (a patois the cons at Cold Mountain used to call da bayou), and Brutal
hollering, "Hey! Quit it! For Chrissakes! Quit it, Percy!"
I had been half-dozing on what was to become Delacroix's bunk, but I was up in a hurry, my heart
slugging away hard in my chest. Noise of that kind on E Block almost never happened until Percy came;
he brought it along with him like a bad smell.
"Come on, you fuckin French-fried faggot!" Percy yelled, ignoring Brutal completely. And here he came,
dragging a guy not much bigger than a bowling pin by one arm. In his other hand, Percy had his baton.
His teeth were bared in a strained grimace, and his face was bright red. Yet he did not look entirely
unhappy. Delacroix was trying to keep up with him, but he had the legirons on, and no matter how fast
he shuffled his feet, Percy pulled him along faster. I sprang out of the cell just in time to catch him as he
fell, and that was how Del and I were introduced.
Percy rounded on him, baton raised, and I held him back with one arm. Brutal came puffing up to us,
looking as shocked and nonplussed by all this as I felt.
"Don't let him hit me no mo, m'sieu," Delacroix babbled. "S'il vous plait, s'il vous plait!"
"Let me at im, let me at im!" Percy cried, lunging forward. He began to hit at Delacroix's shoulders with
his baton. Delacroix held his arms up, screaming, and the stick went whap-whap-whap against the
sleeves of his blue prison shirt. I saw him that night with the shirt off, and that boy had bruises from
Christmas to Easter. Seeing them made me feel bad. He was a murderer, and nobody's darling, but that's
not the way we did things on E Block. Not until Percy came, anyhow.
"Whoa! Whoa!" I roared. "Quit that! What's it all about, anyway?" I was trying to get my body in
between Delacroix's and Percy's, but it wasn't working very well. Percy's club continued to flail away,
now on one side of me and now on the other. Sooner or later he was going to bring one down on me
instead of on his intended target, and then there was going to be a brawl right here in this corridor, no
matter who his relations were. I wouldn't be able to help myself, and Brutal was apt to join in. In someways, you know, I wish we'd done it. It might have changed some of the things that happened later on.
"Fucking faggot! I'll teach you to keep your hands off me, you lousy bum-puncher!"
Whap! Whap! Whap! And now Delacroix was bleeding from one ear and screaming. I gave up trying to
shield him, grabbed him by one shoulder, and hurled him into his cell, where he went sprawling on the
bunk. Percy darted around me and gave him a final hard whap on the butt - one to go on, you could say.
Then Brutal grabbed him - Percy - I mean - by the shoulders and hauled him across the corridor.
I grabbed the cell door and ran it shut on its tracks. Then I turned to Percy, my shock and bewilderment
at war with pure fury. Percy had been around about several months at that point, long enough for all of us
to decide we didn't like him very much, but that was the first time I fully understood how out of control
he was.
He stood watching me, not entirely without fear - he was a coward at heart, I never had any doubt of that
- but still confident that his connections would protect him. In that he was correct. I suspect there are
people who wouldn't understand why that was, even after all I've said, but they would be people who
only know the phrase Great Depression from the history books. If you were there, it was a lot more than
a phrase in a book, and if you had a steady job, brother, you'd do almost anything to keep it.
The color was fading out of Percy's face a little by then, but his cheeks were still flushed, and his hair,
which was usually swept back and gleaming with brilliantine, had tumbled over his forehead.
"What in the Christ was that all about?" I asked. "I have never - I have never! - had a prisoner beaten
onto my block before!"
"Little fag bastard tried to cop my joint when I pulled him out of the van," Percy said. "He had it coming,
and I'd do it again."
I looked at him, too flabbergasted for words. I couldn't imagine the most predatory homosexual on God's
green earth doing what Percy had just described. Preparing to move into a crossbar apartment on the
Green Mile did not, as a rule, put even the most deviant of prisoners in a sexy mood.
I looked back at Delacroix, cowering on his bunk with his arms still up to protect his face. There were
cuffs on his wrists and a chain running between his ankles. Then I turned to Percy "Get out of here," I
said. "I'll want to talk to you later."
"Is this going to be in your report?" he demanded truculently. "Because if it is, I can make a report of my
own, you know."
I didn't want to make a report; I only wanted him out of my sight. I told him so.
"The matter's closed," I finished. I saw Brutal looking at me disapprovingly, but ignored it. "Go on, get
out of here. Go over to Admin and tell them you're supposed to read letters and help in the package
room."
"Sure." He had his composure back, or the crackheaded arrogance that served him as composure. He
brushed his hair back from his forehead with his hands - soft and white and small, the hands of a girl in
her early teens, you would have thought - and then approached the cell. Delacroix saw him, and he
cringed back even farther on his bunk, gibbering in a mixture of English and stewpot French."I ain't done with you, Pierre," he said, then jumped as one of Brutal's huge hands fell on his shoulder.
"Yes you are," Brutal said. "Now go on. Get in the breeze!"
"You don't scare me, you know," Percy said. "Not a bit!" His eyes shifted to me. "Either of you." But we
did. You could see that in his eyes as clear as day, and it made him even more dangerous. A guy like
Percy doesn't even know himself what he means to do from minute to minute and second to second.
What he did right then was turn away from us and go walking up the corridor in long, arrogant strides.
He had shown the world what happened when scrawny, half-bald little Frenchmen tried to cop his joint,
by God, and he was leaving the field a victor.
I went through my set speech, all about how we had the radio - Make Believe Ballroom and Our Gal
Sunday, and how we'd treat him jake if he did the same for us. That little homily was not what you'd call
one of my great successes. He cried all the way through it, sitting huddled up at the foot of his bunk, as
far from me as he could get without actually fading into the corner. He cringed every time I moved, and I
don't think he heard one word in six. Probably just as well. I don't think that particular homily made a
whole lot of sense, anyway.
Fifteen minutes later I was back at the desk, where a shaken-looking Brutus Howell was sitting and
licking the tip of the pencil we kept with the visitors' book. "Will you stop that before you poison
yourself, for God's sake?" I asked.
"Christ almighty Jesus," he said, putting the pencil down. "I never want to have another hooraw like that
with a prisoner coming on the block."
"My Daddy always used to say things come in threes," I said.
"Well, I hope your Daddy was full of shit on that subject," Brutal said, but of course he wasn't. There was
a squall when John Coffey came in, and a fullblown storm when "Wild Bill" joined us - it's funny, but
things really do seem to come in threes. The story of our introduction to Wild Bill, how he came onto the
Mile trying to commit murder, is something I'll get to shortly; fair warning.
"What's this about Delacroix copping his joint?" I asked.
Brutal snorted. "He was ankle-chained and ole Percy was just pulling him too fast, that's all. He stumbled
and started to fall as he got out of the stagecoach. He put his hands out same as anyone would when they
start to fall, and one of them brushed the front of Percy's pants. It was a complete accident!"
"Did Percy know that, do you think?" I asked. "Was he maybe using it as an excuse just because he felt
like whaling on Delacroix a little bit? Showing him who bosses the shooting match around here?"
Brutal nodded slowly. "Yeah. I think that was probably it."
"We have to watch him, then," I said, and ran my hands, through my hair. As if the job wasn't hard
enough. "God, I hate this. I hate him."
"Me, too. And you want to know something else, Paul? I don't understand him. He's got connections, I
understand that, all right, but why would he use them to get a job on the Green fucking Mile? Anywhere
in the state pen, for that matter? Why not as a page in the state senate, or the guy who makes the
lieutenant governor's appointments? Surely his people could've gotten him something better if he'd askedthem, so why here?"
I shook my head. I didn't know. There were a lot of things I didn't know then. I suppose I was naive.
8.
After that, things went back to normal again ... for awhile, at least. Down in the county seat, the state was
preparing to bring John Coffey to trial, and Trapingus County Sheriff Homer Cribus was pooh-poohing
the idea that a lynch-mob might hurry justice along a little bit. None of that mattered to us; on E Block,
no one paid much attention to the news. Life on the Green Mile was, in a way, like life in a soundproof
room. From time to time you heard mutterings that were probably explosions in the outside world, but
that was about all. They wouldn't hurry with John Coffey; they'd want to make damned sure of him.
On a couple of occasions Percy got to ragging Delacroix, and the second time I pulled him aside and told
him to come up to my office. It wasn't my first interview with Percy on the subject of his behavior, and it
wouldn't be the last, but it was prompted by what, was probably the clearest understanding of what he
was. He had the heart of a cruel boy who goes to the zoo not so he can study the animals but so he can
throw stones at them in their cages.
"You stay away from him, now, you hear?" I said. "Unless I give you a specific order, just stay the hell
away from him."
Percy combed his hair back, then patted at it with his sweet little hands. That boy just loved touching his
hair. "I wasn't doing nothing to him," he said. "Only asking how it felt to know you had burned up some
babies, is all." Percy gave me a round-eyed, innocent stare.
"You quit with it, or there'll be a report," I said.
He laughed. "Make any report you want," he said. "Then I'll turn around and make my own. Just like I
told you when he came in. We'll see who comes off the best."
I leaned forward, hands folded on my desk, and spoke in a tone I hoped would sound like a friend being
confidential. "Brutus Howell doesn't like you much," I said. "And when Brutal doesn't like someone, he's
been known to make his own report. He isn't much shakes with a pen, and he can't quit from licking that
pencil, so he's apt to report with his fists. If you know what I mean."Percy's complacent little smile faltered. "What are you trying to say""I'm not trying to say anything. I have said it. And if you tell any of your ...friends ... about this
discussion, I'll say you made the whole thing up." I looked at him all wide-eyed and earnest. "Besides,
I'm trying to be your friend, Percy. A word to the wise is sufficient, they say. And why would you want
to get into it with Delacroix in the first place? He's not worth it."
And for awhile that worked. There was peace. A couple of times I was even able to send Percy with
Dean or Harry when Delacroix's time to shower had rolled around. We had the radio at night, Delacroix
began to relax a little into the scant routine of E Block, and there was peace.
Then, one night, I heard him laughing.
Harry Terwilliger was on the desk, and soon he was laughing, too. I got up and went on down to
Delacroix's cell to see what he possibly had to laugh about."Look, Cap'n" he said when he saw me. "I done tame me a mouse!"
It was Steamboat Willy. He was in Delacroix's cell. More: he was sitting on Delacroix's shoulder and
looking calmly out through the bars at us with his little oildrop eyes. His tail was curled around his paws,
and he looked completely at peace. As for Delacroix - friend, you wouldn't have known it was the same
man who'd sat cringing and shuddering at the foot of his bunk not a week before. He looked like my
daughter used to on Christmas morning, when she came down the stairs and saw the presents.
"Watch dis!" Delacroix said. The mouse was sitting on his right shoulder. Delacroix stretched out his left
arm. The mouse scampered up to the top of Delacroix's head, using the man's hair (which was thick
enough in back, at least) to climb up. Then he scampered down the other side, Delacroix giggling as his
tail tickled the side of his neck. The mouse ran all the way down his arm to his wrist, then turned,
scampered back up to Delacroix's left shoulder, and curled his tail around his feet again.
"I'll be damned," Harry said.
"I train him to do that," Delacroix said proudly. I thought, In a pig's ass you did, but kept my mouth shut.
"His name is Mr. Jingles."
"Nah," Harry said goodnaturedly. "It's Steamboat Willy, like in the pitcher-show. Boss Howell named
him."
"It's Mr. Jingles," Delacroix said. On any other subject he would have told you that shit was Shinola, if
you wanted him to, but on the subject of the mouse's name he was perfectly adamant. "He whisper it in
my ear. Cap'n, can I have a box for him? Can I have a box for my mous', so he can sleep in here wit me?"
His voice began to fall into wheedling tones I had heard a thousand times before. "I put him under my
bunk and he never be a scrid of trouble, not one."
"Your English gets a hell of a lot better when you want something," I said, stalling for time.
"Oh-oh," Harry murmured, nudging me. "Here comes trouble."
But Percy didn't look like trouble to me, not that night. He wasn't running his hands through his hair or
fiddling with that baton of his, and the top button of his uniform shirt was actually undone. It was the
first time I'd seen him that way, and it was amazing, what a change a little thing like that could make.
Mostly, though, what struck me was the expression on his face. There was a calmness there. Not serenity
- I don't think Percy Wetmore had a serene bone in his body - but the look of a man who has discovered
he can wait for the things he wants. It was quite a change from the young man I'd had to threaten with
Brutus Howell's fists only a few days before.
Delacroix didn't see the change, though; he cringed against the wall of his cell, drawing his knees up to
his chest. His eyes seemed to grow until they were taking up half his face. The mouse scampered up on
his bald pate and sat there. I don't know if he remembered that he also had reason to distrust Percy, but it
certainly looked as if he did. Probably it was just smelling the little Frenchman's fear, and reacting off
that.
"Well, well," Percy said. "Looks like you found yourself a friend, Eddie."
Delacroix tried to reply-some hollow defiance about what would happen to Percy if Percy hurt his new
pal would have been my guess - but nothing came out. His lower lip trembled a little, but that was all. Ontop of his head, Mr. Jingles wasn't trembling. He sat perfectly still with his back feet in Delacroix's hair
and his front ones splayed on Delacroix's bald looking at Percy, seeming to size him up. The way you'd
size up an old enemy.
Percy looked at me. "Isn't that the same one I chased? The one that lives in the restraint room?"
I nodded. I had an idea Percy hadn't seen the newly named Mr. Jingles since that last chase, and he
showed no signs of wanting to chase it now.
"Yes, that's the one," I said. "Only Delacroix there says his name is Mr. Jingles, not Steamboat Willy.
Says the mouse whispered it in his ear."
"Is that so," Percy said. "Wonders never cease, do they?" I half-expected him to pull out his baton and
start tapping it against the bars, just to show Delacroix who was boss, but he only stood there with his
hands on his hips, looking in.
And for no reason I could have told you in words, I said: "Delacroix there was just asking for a box,
Percy. He thinks that mouse will sleep in it, I guess. That he can keep it for a pet." I loaded my voice
with skepticism, and sensed more than saw Harry looking at me in surprise. "What do you think about
that?"
"I think it'll probably shit up his nose some night while he's sleeping and then run away," Percy said
evenly, "but I guess that's the French boy's lookout. I seen a pretty nice cigar box on Toot-Toot's cart the
other night. I don't know if he'd give it away, though. Probably want a nickel for it, maybe even a dime."
Now I did risk a glance at Harry, and saw his mouth hanging open. This wasn't quite like the change in
Ebenezer Scrooge on Christmas morning, after the ghosts had had their way with him, but it was damned
close.
Percy leaned closer to Delacroix, putting his face between the bars. Delacroix shrank back even farther. I
swear to God that he would have melted into that wall if he'd been able."You got a nickel or maybe as much as a dime to pay for a cigar box, you lugoon?" he asked.
"I got four pennies,", Delacroix said. "I give them for a box, if it a good one, s'il est bon."
"I'll tell you what," Percy said. "If that toothless old whoremaster will sell you that Corona box for four
cents, I'll sneak some cotton batting out of the dispensary to line it with. We'll make us a regular Mousie
Hilton, before we're through." He shifted his eyes to me. "I'm supposed to write a switch-room report
about Bitterbuck," he said. "Is there some pens in your office, Paul?""Yes, indeed," I said. "Forms, too. Lefthand top drawer."
"Well, that's aces," he said, and went swaggering off.
Harry and I looked at each other. "Is he sick, do you think?" Harry asked. "Maybe went to his doctor and
found out he's only got three months to live?"
I told him I didn't have the slightest idea what was up. It was the truth then, and for awhile after, but I
found out in time. And a few years later, I had an interesting supper-table conversation with Hal Moores.
By then we could talk freely, what with him being retired and me being at the Boys' Correctional. It wasone of those meals where you drink too much and eat too little, and tongues get loosened. Hal told me
that Percy had been in to complain about me and about life on the Mile in general. This was just after
Delacroix came on the block, and Brutal and I had kept Percy from beating him half to death. What had
griped Percy the most was me telling him to get out of my sight. He didn't think a man who was related
to the governor should have to put up with talk like that.
Well, Moores told me, he had stood Percy off for as long as he could, and when it became dear to him
that Percy was going to try pulling some strings to get me reprimanded and moved to another part of the
prison at the very least, he, Moores, had pulled Percy into his office and told him that if he quit rocking
the boat, Moores would make sure that Percy was out front for Delacroix's execution. That he would, in
fact, be placed right beside the chair. I would be in charge, as always, but the witnesses wouldn't know
that; to them it would look as if Mr. Percy Wetmore was boss of the cotillion. Moores wasn't promising
any more than what we'd already discussed and I'd gone along with, but Percy didn't know that. He
agreed to leave off his threats to have me reassigned, and the atmosphere on E Block sweetened. He had
even agreed that Delacroix could keep Percy's old nemesis as a pet. It's amazing how some men can
change, given the right incentive; in Percy's case, all Warden Moores had to offer was the chance to take
a bald little Frenchman's life.
9.
Toot-Toot felt that four cents was far too little for a prime Corona cigar box, and in that he was probably
right - cigar boxes were highly prized objects in prison. A thousand different small items could be stored
in them, the smell was pleasant, and there was something about them that reminded our customers of
what it was like to be free men. Because cigarettes were permitted in prison but cigars were not, I
imagine.
Dean Stanton, who was back on the block by then, added a penny to the pot, and I kicked one in, as well.
When Toot still proved reluctant, Brutal went to work on him, first telling him he ought to be ashamed of
himself for behaving like such a cheapskate, then promising him that he, Brutus Howell, would
personally put that Corona box back in Toot's hands the day after Delacroix's execution. "Six cents might
or might not be enough if you was speaking about selling that cigar box, we could have a good old
barber-shop argument about that," Brutal said, "but you have to admit it's a great price for renting one.
He's gonna walk the Mile in a month, six weeks at the very outside. Why, that box'll be back on the shelf
under your cart almost before you know it's gone."
"He could get a soft-hearted judge to give im a stay and still be here to sing 'Should old acquaintances be
forgot,'" Toot said, but he knew better and Brutal knew he did. Old Toot-Toot had been pushing that
damned Bible-quoting cart of his around Cold Mountain since Pony Express days, practically, and he had
plenty of sources, better than ours, I thought then. He knew Delacroix was fresh out of soft-hearted
judges. All he had left to hope for was the governor, who as a rule didn't issue clemency to folks who had
baked half a dozen of his constituents.
"Even if he don't get a stay, that mouse'd be shitting in that box until October, maybe even
Thanksgiving," Toot argued, but Brutal could see he was weakening. "Who gonna buy a cigar box some
mouse been using for a toilet?"
"Oh jeez-Louise," Brutal said. "That's the numbest thing I've ever heard you say, Toot. I mean, that takes
the cake. First, Delacroix will keep the box clean enough to eat a church dinner out of - the way he lovesthat mouse, he'd lick it clean if that's what it took."
"Easy on dat stuff," Toot said, wrinkling his nose.
"Second," Brutal went on, "mouse-shit is no big deal, anyway. It's just hard little pellets, looks like
birdshot. Shake it right out. Nothing to it!"
Old Toot knew better than to carry his protest any further; he'd been on the yard long enough to
understand when he could afford to face into the breeze and when he'd do better to bend in the hurricane.
This wasn't exactly a hurricane, but we bluesuits liked the mouse, and we liked the idea of Delacroix
having the mouse, and that meant it was at least a gale. So Delacroix got his box, and Percy was as good
as his word - two days later the bottom was lined with soft pads of cotton batting from the dispensary.
Percy handed them over himself, and I could see the fear in Delacroix's eyes as he reached out through
the bars to take them. He was afraid Percy would grab his hand and break his fingers. I was a little afraid
of it too, but no such thing happened. That was the closest I ever came to liking Percy, but even then it
was hard to mistake the look of cool amusement in his eyes. Delacroix had a pet; Percy had one too.
Delacroix would keep his, petting it and loving it as long as he could; Percy would wait patiently (as
patiently as a man like him could anyway), and then burn his alive.
"Mousie Hilton, open for business." Harry said. "The only question is, will the little bugger use it?"
That question was answered as soon as Delacroix caught Mr. Jingles up in one hand and lowered him
gently into the box. The mouse snuggled into the white cotton as if it were Aunt Bea's comforter, and that
was his home from then until ... well, I'll get to the end of Mr. Jingles's story in good time.
Old Toot-Toots worries that the cigar box would, fill up with mouse-shit proved to be entirely
groundless. I never saw a single turd in there, and Delacroix said he never did, either, anywhere in his
cell, for that matter. Much later, around the time Brutal showed me the hole in the beam and we found
the colored splinters, I moved a chair out of the restraint room's east corner and found a little pile of
mouse turds back there. He had always gone back to the same place to do his business, seemingly, and as
far from us as he could get. Here's another thing: I never saw him peeing, and usually mice can hardly
turn the faucet off for two minutes at a time, especially while they're eating. I told you, the damned thing
was one of God's mysteries.
A week or so after Mr. Jingles had settled into the cigar box, Delacroix called me and Brutal down to his
cell to see something. He did that so much it was annoying - if Mr. Jingles so much as rolled over on his
back with his paws in the air, it was the cutest thing on God's earth, as far as that half-pint Cajun was
concerned - but this time what he was up to really was sort of amusing.Delacroix had been pretty much forgotten by the world following his conviction, but he had one relation
- an old maiden aunt, I believe - who wrote him once a week. She had also sent him an enormous bag of
peppermint candies, the sort which are marketed under the name Canada Mints these days. They looked
like big pink pills. Delacroix was not allowed to have the whole bag at once, naturally - it was a
five-pounder, and he would have gobbled them until he had to go to the infirmary with stomach-gripes.
Like almost every murderer we ever had on the Mile, he had absolutely no understanding of moderation.
We'd give them out to him half a dozen at a time, and only then if he remembered to ask.
Mr. Jingles was sitting beside Delacroix on the bunk when we got down there, holding one of those pink
candies in his paws and munching contentedly away at it. Delacroix was simply overcome with delight -he was like a classical pianist watching his five-year-old son play his first halting exercises. But don't get
me wrong; it was funny, a real hoot. The candy was half the size of Mr. Jingles, and his whitefurred belly
was already distended from it.
"Take it away from him, Eddie," Brutal said, half-laughing and half-horrified. "Christ almighty Jesus,
he'll eat till he busts. I can smell that peppermint from here. How many have you let him have?"
"This his second," Delacroix said, looking a little nervously at Mr. Jingles's belly. "You really think he ...
you know ... bus' his guts?"
"Might," Brutal said.
That was enough authority for Delacroix. He reached for the half-eaten pink mint. I expected the mouse
to nip him, but Mr. Jingles gave over that mint - what remained of it, anyway - as meek as could be. I
looked at Brutal, and Brutal gave his head a little shake as if to say no, he didn't understand it, either.
Then Mr. Jingles plopped down into his box and lay there on his side in an exhausted way that made all
three of us laugh. After that, we got used to seeing the mouse sitting beside Delacroix, holding a mint and
munching away on it just as neatly as an old lady at an afternoon tea-party, both of them surrounded by
what I later smelled in that hole in the beam - the half-bitter, half-sweet smell of peppermint candy.
There's one more thing to tell you about Mr. Jingles before moving on to the arrival of William Wharton,
which was when the cyclone really touched down on E Block. A week or so after the incident of the
peppermint candies - around the time when we'd pretty much decided Delacroix wasn't going to feed his
pet to death, in other words - the Frenchman called me down to his cell. I was on my own for the time
being, Brutal over at the commissary for something, and according to the regs, I was not supposed to
approach a prisoner in such circumstances. But since I probably could have shot-putted Delacroix twenty
yards one-handed on a good day, I decided to break the rule and see what he wanted.
"Watch this, Boss Edgecombe," he said. "You gonna see what Mr. Jingles can do!" He reached behind
the cigar box and brought up a small wooden spool.
"Where'd you get that?" I asked him, although I supposed I knew. There was really only one person he
could have gotten it from.
"Old Toot-Toot," he said. 'Watch this."
I was already watching, and could see Mr. Jingles in his box, standing up with his small front paws
propped on the edge, his black eyes fixed on the spool Delacroix was holding between the thumb and
first finger of his right hand. I felt a funny little chill go up my back. I had never seen a mere mouse
attend to something with such sharpness - with such intelligence. I don't really believe that Mr. Jingles
was a supernatural visitation, and if I have given you that idea, I'm sorry, but I have never doubted that
he was a genius of his kind.
Delacroix bent over and rolled the threadless spool across the floor of his cell. It went easily, like a pair
of wheels connected by an axle. The mouse was out of his box in a flash and across the floor after it, like
a dog chasing after a stick. I exclaimed with surprise, and Delacroix grinned.
The spool hit the wall and rebounded. Mr. Jingles went around it and pushed it back to the bunk,
switching from one end of the spool to the other whenever it looked like it was going to veer offcourse.
He pushed the spool until it hit Delacroix's foot. Then he looked up at him for a moment, as if to makesure Delacroix had no more immediate tasks for him (a few arithmetic problems to solve, perhaps, or
some Latin to parse). Apparently satisfied on this score, Mr. Jingles went back to the cigar box and
settled down in it again.
"You taught him that," I said.
"Yessir, Boss Edgecombe," Delacroix said, his smile only slightly dissembling. "He fetch it every time.
Smart as hell, ain't he?"
"And the spool?" I asked. "How did you know to fetch that for him, Eddie?"
"He whisper in my ear that he want it," Delacroix said serenely. "Same as he whisper his name."
Delacroix showed all the other guys his mouse's trick ... all except Percy. To Delacroix, it didn't matter
that Percy had suggested the cigar box and procured the cotton with which to line it. Delacroix was like
some dogs: kick them once and they never trust you again, no matter how nice you are to them.
I can hear Delacroix now, yelling, Hey, you guys! Come and see what Mr. Jingles can do! And them
going down in a bluesuit cluster - Brutal, Harry, Dean, even Bill Dodge. All of them had been properly
amazed, too, the same as I had been.
Three or four days after Mr. Jingles started doing the trick with the spool, Harry Terwilliger rummaged
through the arts and crafts stuff we kept in the restraint room, found the Crayolas, and brought them to
Delacroix with a smile that was almost embarrassed. "I thought you might like to make that spool
different colors," he said. "Then your little pal'd be like a circus mouse, or something."
"A circus mouse!" Delacroix said, looking completely, rapturously happy. I suppose he was completely
happy, maybe for the first time in his whole miserable life. "That just what he is, too! A circus mouse!
When I get outta here, he gonna make me rich, like inna circus! You see if he don't."
Percy Wetmore would no doubt have pointed out to Delacroix that when he left Cold Mountain, he'd be
riding in an ambulance that didn't need to run its light or siren, but Harry knew better. He just told
Delacroix to make the spool as colorful as he could as quick as he could, because he'd have to take the
crayons back after dinner.
Del made it colorful, all right. When he was done, one end of the spool was yellow, the other end was
green, and the drum in the middle was firehouse red. We got used to hearing Delacroix trumpet,
"Maintenant, m'sieurs et mesdames! Le cirque presentement le mous' amusant et amazeant!" That wasn't
exactly it, but it gives you an idea of that stewpot French of his. Then he'd make this sound way down in
his throat - I think it was supposed to represent a drumroll - and fling the spool. Mr. Jingles would be
after it in a flash, either nosing it back or rolling it with his paws. That second way really was something
you would have paid to see in a circus, I think. Delacroix and his mouse and his mouse's brightly colored
spool were our chief amusements at the time that John Coffey came into our care and custody, and that
was the way things remained for awhile. Then my urinary infection, which had lain still for awhile, came
back, and William Wharton arrived, and all hell broke loose.
10.
The dates have mostly slipped out of my head. I suppose I could have my granddaughter, Danielle, look
some of them out of the old newspaper files, but what would be the point? The most important of them,like the day we came down to Delacroix's cell and found the mouse sitting on his shoulder, or the dayWilliam Wharton came on the block and almost killed Dean Stanton, would not be in the papers,
anyway. Maybe it's better to go on just as I have been; in the end, I guess the dates don't matter much, if
you can remember the things you saw and keep them in the right order.
I know that things got squeezed together a little. When Delacroix's DOE papers finally came to me from
Curtis Anderson's office, I was amazed to see that our Cajun pal's date with Old Sparky had been
advanced from when we had expected, a thing that was almost unheard of, even in those days when you
didn't have to move half of heaven and all the earth to execute a man. It was a matter of two days, I think,
from the twenty-seventh of October to the twenty-fifth. Don't hold me to it exactly, but I know that's
close; I remember thinking that Toot was going to get his Corona box back even sooner than he had
expected.
Wharton, meanwhile, got to us later than expected. For one thing, his trial ran longer than Anderson's
usually reliable sources had thought it would (when it came to Wild Billy, nothing was reliable, we
would soon discover, including our time-tested and supposedly foolproof methods of prisoner control).
Then, after he had been found guilty - that much, at least, went according to the script - he was taken to
Indianola General Hospital for tests. He had had a number of supposed seizures during the trial, twice
serious enough to send him crashing to the floor, where he lay shaking and flopping and drumming his
feet on the boards. Wharton's court-appointed lawyer claimed he suffered from "epilepsy spells" and had
committed his crimes while of unsound mind; the prosecution claimed the fits were the sham acting of a
coward desperate to save his own life. After observing the so-called "epilepsy spells" at first hand, the
jury decided the fits were an act. The judge concurred but ordered a series of pre-sentencing tests after
the verdict came down. God knows why; perhaps he was only curious.
It's a blue-eyed wonder that Wharton didn't escape from the hospital (and the irony that Warden Moore's
wife, Melinda, was in the same hospital at the same time did not escape any of us), but he didn't. They
had him surrounded by guards, I suppose, and perhaps he still had hopes of being declared incompetent
by reason of epilepsy, if there is such a thing.
He wasn't. The doctors found nothing wrong with his brain - physiologically, at least - and Billy "the
Kid" Wharton was at last bound for Cold Mountain. That might have been around the sixteenth or the
eighteenth; it's my recollection that Wharton arrived about two weeks after John Coffey and a week or
ten days before Delacroix walked the Green Mile.
The day our new psychopath joined us was an eventful one for me. I woke up at four that morning with
my groin throbbing and my penis feeling hot and clogged and swollen. Even before I swung my feet out
of bed, I knew that my urinary infection wasn't getting better, as I had hoped. It had been a brief turn for
the better, that was all, and it was over.
I went out to the privy to do my business - this was at least three years before we put in our first
water-closet - and had gotten no further than the woodpile at the comer of the house when I realized I
couldn't hold it any longer. I lowered my pajama pants just as the urine started to flow, and that flow was
accompanied by the most excruciating. pain of my entire life. I passed a gall-stone in 1956, and I know
people say that is the worst, but that gall-stone was like a touch of acid indigestion compared to this
outrage.
My knees came unhinged and I fell heavily onto them, tearing out the seat of my pajama pants when Ispread my legs to keep from losing my balance and going face-first into a puddle of my own piss. I still
might have gone over if I hadn't grabbed one of the woodpile logs with my left hand. All that, though,
could have been going on in Australia, or even on another planet. All I was concerned with was the pain
that had set me on fire; my lower belly was burning, and my penis - an organ which had gone mostly
forgotten by me except when providing me the most intense physical pleasure a man can experience -
now felt as if it were melting; I expected to look down and see blood gushing from its tip, but it appeared
to be a perfectly ordinary stream of urine.
I hung onto the woodpile with one hand and put the other across my mouth, concentrating on keeping my
mouth shut. I did not want to frighten my wife awake with a scream. It seemed that I went on pissing
forever, but at last the stream dried up. By then the pain had sunk deep into my stomach and my testicles,
biting like rusty teeth. For a long while - it might have been as long as a minute - I was physically
incapable of getting up. At last the pain began to abate, and I struggled to my feet. I looked at my urine,
already soaking into the ground, and wondered if any sane God could make a world where such a little
bit of dampness could come at the cost of such horrendous pain.
I would call in sick, I thought, and go see Dr. Sadler after all. I didn't want the stink and the queasiness of
Dr. Sadler's sulfa tablets, but anything would be better than kneeling beside the woodpile, trying not to
scream while my prick was reporting that it had apparently been doused with coal-oil and set afire.
Then, as I was swallowing aspirin in our kitchen and listening to Jan snore lightly in the other room, I
remembered that today was the day William Wharton was scheduled on the block, and that Brutal
wouldn't be there - the roster had him over on the other side of the prison, helping to move the rest of the
library and some leftover infirmary equipment to the new building. One thing I didn't feel right about in
spite of my pain was leaving Wharton to Dean and Harry. They were good men, but Curtis Anderson's
report had suggested that William Wharton was exceptionally bad news. This man just doesn't care, he
had written, underlining for emphasis.
By then the pain had abated some, and I could think. The best idea, it seemed to me, was to leave for the
prison early. I could get there at six, which was the time Warden Moores usually came in. He could get
Brutus Howell reassigned to E Block long enough for Wharton's reception, and I'd make my
long-overdue trip to the doctor. Cold Mountain was actually on my way.Twice on the twenty-mile ride to the Penitentiary that sudden need to urinate overcame me. Both times I
was able to pull over and take care of the problem without embarrassing myself (for one thing, traffic on
country roads at such an hour was all but nonexistent). Neither of these two voidings was as painful as
the one that had taken me off my feet on the way to the privy, but both times I had to clutch the
passenger-side doorhandle of my little Ford coupe to hold myself up, and I could feel sweat running
down my hot face. I was sick, all right, good and sick.
I made it, though, drove in through the south gate, parked in my usual place, and went right up to see the
warden. It was going on six o'clock by then. Miss Hannah's office was empty - she wouldn't be in until
the relatively civilized hour of seven - but the light was on in Moores's office; I could see it through the
pebbled glass. I gave a perfunctory knock and opened the door. Moores looked up, startled to see anyone
at that unusual hour, and I would have given a great deal not to have been the one to see him in that
condition, with his face naked and unguarded. His white hair, usually so neatly combed, was sticking up
in tufts and tangles; his hands were in it, yanking and pulling, when I walked in. His eyes were raw, the
skin beneath them puffy and swollen. His palsy was the worst I had ever seen it; he looked like a manwho had just come inside after a long walk on a terribly cold night.
"Hal, I'm sorry, I'll come back----!" I began.
"No," he said. "Please, Paul. Come in. Shut the door and come in. I need someone now, if I ever needed
anyone in my whole life. Shut the door and come in."
I did as he asked, forgetting my own pain for the first time since I'd awakened that morning.
"It's a brain tumor," Moores said. "They got X-ray pictures of it. They seemed real pleased with their
pictures, actually. One of them said they may be the best ones anyone's ever gotten, at least so far; said
they're going to publish them in some biggety medical journal up in New England. It's the size of a
lemon, they said, and way down deep inside, where they can't operate. They say she'll be dead by
Christmas. I haven't told her. I can't think how. I can't think how for the life of me."
Then he began to cry, big, gasping sobs that filled me with both pity and a kind of terror - when a man
who keeps himself as tightly guarded as Hal Moores finally does lose control, it's frightening to watch. I
stood there for a moment, then went to him and put my arm around his shoulders. He groped out for me
with both of his own arms, like a drowning man, and began to sob against my stomach, all restraint
washed away. Later, after he got himself under control, he apologized. He did it without quite meeting
my eyes, as a man does when he feels he has embarrassed himself dreadfully, maybe so deeply that he
can never quite live it down. A man can end up hating the fellow who has seen him in such a state. I
thought Warden Moores was better than that, but it never crossed my mind to do the business I had
originally come for, and when I left Moores's office, I walked over to E Block instead of back to my car.
The aspirin was working by then, and the pain in my midsection was down to a low throb. I would get
through the day somehow, I reckoned, get Wharton settled in, check back with Hal Moores that
afternoon, and get my sick-leave for tomorrow. The worst was pretty much over, I thought, with no
slightest idea that the worst of that day's mischief hadn't even begun.11.
"We thought he was still doped from the tests," Dean said late that afternoon. His voice was low, rasping,
almost a bark, and there were blackish-purple bruises rising on his neck. I could see it was hurting him to
talk and thought of telling him to let it go, but sometimes it hurts more to be quiet. I judged that this was
one of those times, and kept my own mouth shut. "We all thought he was doped, didn't we?"
Harry Terwilliger nodded. Even Percy, sitting off by himself in his own sullen little party of one, nodded.
Brutal glanced at me, and for a moment I met his eyes. We were thinking pretty much that same thing,
that this was the way it happened. You were cruising along, everything going according to Hoyle, you
made one mistake, and bang, the sky fell down on you. They had thought he was doped, it was a
reasonable assumption to make, but no one had asked if he was doped. I thought I saw something else in
Brutal's eyes, as well: Harry and Dean would learn from their mistake. Especially Dean, who could easily
have gone home to his family dead. Percy wouldn't. Percy maybe couldn't. All Percy could do was sit in
the corner and sulk because he was in the shit again.
There were seven of them that went up to Indianola to take charge of Wild Bill Wharton: Harry, Dean,
Percy, two other guards in the back (I have forgotten their names, although I'm sure I knew them once),
plus two up front. They took what we used to call the stagecoach - a Ford panel-truck which had beensteel-reinforced and equipped with supposedly bulletproof glass. It looked like a cross between a
milk-wagon and an armored car.
Harry Terwilliger was technically in charge of the expedition. He handed his paperwork over to the
county sheriff (not Homer Cribus but some other elected yokel like him, I imagine), who in turn handed
over Mr. William Wharton, hellraiser extraordinaire, as Delacroix might have put it. A Cold Mountain
prison uniform had been sent ahead, but the sheriff and his men hadn't bothered to put Wharton in it; they
left that to our boys. Wharton was dressed in a cotton hospital johnny and cheap felt slippers when they
first met him on the second floor of the General Hospital, a scrawny man with a narrow, pimply face and
a lot of long, tangly blond hair. His ass, also narrow and also covered with pimples, stuck out the back of
the johnny. That was the part of him Harry and the others saw first, because Wharton was standing at the
window and looking out at the parking lot when they came in. He didn't turn but just stood there, holding
the curtains back with one hand, silent as a doll while Harry bitched at the county sheriff about being too
lazy to get Wharton into his prison blues and the county sheriff lectured - as every county official I've
ever met seems bound to do - about what was his job and what was not.
When Harry got tired of that part (I doubt it took him long), he told Wharton to turn around. Wharton
did. He looked, Dean told us in his raspy bark of a half-choked voice, like any one of a thousand
backcountry stampeders who had wound their way through Cold Mountain during our years there. Boil
that look down and what you got was a dullard with a mean steak. Sometimes you also discovered a
yellow streak in them, once their backs were to the wall, but more often there was nothing there but fight
and mean and then more fight and more mean. There are people who see nobility in folks like Billy
Wharton, but I am not one of them. A rat will fight, too, if it is cornered. This man's face seemed to have
no more personality than his acne-studded backside, Dean told us. His jaw was slack, his eyes distant, his
shoulders slumped, his hands dangling. He looked shot up with morphine, all right, every bit as coo-coo
as any dopefiend any of them had ever seen.
At this, Percy gave another of his sullen nods.
"Put this on," Harry said, indicating the uniform on the foot of the bed - it had been taken out of the
brown paper it was wrapped in, but otherwise not touched-it was still folded just as it had been in the
prison laundry, with a pair of white cotton boxer shorts poking out of one shirtsleeve and a pair of white
socks poking out of the other.
Wharton seemed willing enough to comply, but wasn't able to get very far without help. He managed the
boxers, but when it came to the pants, he kept trying to put both legs into the same hole. Finally Dean
helped him, getting his feet to go where they belonged and then yanking the trousers up, doing the fly,
and snapping the waistband.. Wharton only stood there, not even trying to help once he saw that Dean
was doing it for him. He stared vacantly across the room, hands lax, and it didn't occur to any of them
that he was shamming. Not in hopes of escape (at least I don't believe that was it) but only in hopes of
making the maximum amount of trouble when the right time came.
The papers were signed. William Wharton, who had become county property when he was arrested, now
became the state's property. He was taken down the back stairs and through the kitchen, surrounded by
bluesuits. He walked with his head down and his long-fingered hands dangling. The first time his cap fell
off, Dean put it back on him. The second time, he just tucked it into his own back pocket.
He had another chance to make trouble in the back of the stagecoach, when they were shackling him, anddidn't. If he thought (even now I'm not sure if he did, or if he did, how much), he must have thought that
the space was too small and the numbers too great to cause a satisfactory hooraw. So on went the chains,
one set running between his ankles and another set too long, it turned out, between his wrists.
The drive to Cold Mountain took an hour. During that whole time, Wharton sat on the lefthand bench up
by the cab, head lowered, cuffed hands dangling between his knees. Every now and then he hummed a
little, Harry said, and Percy roused himself enough from his funk to say that the lugoon dripped spittle
from his lax lower lip, a drop at a time, until it had made a puddle between his feet. Like a dog dripping
off the end of its tongue on a hot summer day.
They drove in through the south gate when they got to the pen, right past my car, I guess. The guard on
the south pass tan back the big door between the lot and the exercise yard, and the stagecoach drove
through. It was a slack time in the yard, not many men out and most of them hoeing in the garden.
Pumpkin time, it would have been. They drove straight across to E Block and stopped. The driver opened
the door and told them he was going to take the stagecoach over to the motor-pool to have the oil
changed, it had been good working with them. The extra guards went with the vehicle, two of them
sitting in the back eating apples, the doors now swinging open.
That left Dean, Harry and Percy with one shackled prisoner. It should have been enough, would have
been enough, if they hadn't been lulled by the stick thin country boy standing head-down there in the dirt
with chains on his wrists and ankles. They marched him the twelve or so paces to the door that opened
into E Block, falling into the same formation we used when escorting prisoners down the Green Mile.
Harry was on his left, Dean was on his right, and Percy was behind, with his baton in his hand. No one
told me that, but I know damned well he had it out; Percy loved that hickory stick. As for me, I was
sitting in what would be Wharton's home until it came time for him to check into the hot place-first cell
on the right as you headed down the corridor toward the restraint room. I had my clipboard in my hands
and was thinking of nothing but making my little set speech and getting the hell out. The pain in my
groin was building up again, and all I wanted was to go into my office and wait for it to pass.
Dean stepped forward to unlock the door. He selected the right key from the bunch on his belt and slid it
into the lock. Wharton came alive just as Dean turned the key and pulled the handle. He voiced a
screaming, gibbering cry - a kind of Rebel yell - that froze Harry to temporary immobility and pretty
much finished Percy Wetmore for the entire encounter. I heard that scream through the partly opened
door and didn't associate it with anything human at first; I thought a dog had gotten into the yard
somehow and had been hurt; that perhaps some mean tempered con had hit it with a hoe.
Wharton lifted his arms, dropped the chain which hung between his wrists over Dean's head, and
commenced to choke him with it. Dean gave a strangled cry and lurched forward, into the cool electric
light of our little world. Wharton was happy to go with him, even gave him a shove, all the time yelling
and gibbering, even laughing. He had his arms cocked at the elbows with his fists up by Dean's ears,
yanking the chain as tight as he could, whipsawing it back and forth.
Harry landed on Wharton's back, wrapping one hand in our new boy's greasy blond hair and slamming
his other fist into the side of Wharton's face as hard as he could. He had both a baton of his own and a
sidearm pistol, but in his excitement drew neither. We'd had trouble with prisoners before, you bet, but
never one who'd taken any of us by surprise the way that Wharton did. The man's slyness was beyond
our experience. I had never seen its like before, and have never seen it again.And he was strong. All that slack looseness was gone. Harry said later that it was like jumping onto a
coiled nest of steel springs that had somehow come to life. Wharton, now inside and near the duty desk,
whirled to his left and flung Harry off. Harry hit the desk and went sprawling.
"Whoooee, boys!" Wharton laughed. "Ain't this a party, now? Is it, or what?"
Still screaming and laughing, Wharton went back to choking Dean with his chain. Why not? Wharton
knew what we all knew: they could only fry him once.
"Hit him, Percy, hit him!" Harry screamed, struggling to his feet. But Percy only stood there, hickory
baton in hand, eyes as wide as soup-plates. Here was the chance he'd been looking for, you would have
said, his golden opportunity to put that tallywhacker of his to good use, and he was too scared and
confused to do it. This wasn't some terrified little Frenchman or a black giant who hardly seemed to be in
his own body; this was a whirling devil.
I came out of Wharton's cell, dropping my clipboard and pulling my .38. I had forgotten the infection that
was heating up my middle for the second time that day. I didn't doubt the story the others told of
Wharton's blank face and dull eyes when they told it, but that wasn't the Wharton I saw. What I saw was
the face of an animal - not an intelligent animal, but one filled with cunning ... and meanness ... and joy.
Yes. He was doing what he had been made to do. The place and the circumstances didn't matter. The
other thing I saw was Dean Stanton's red, swelling face. He was dying in front of my eyes. Wharton saw
the gun and turned Dean toward it, so that I'd almost certainly have to hit one to hit the other. From over
Dean's shoulder, one blazing blue eye dared me to shoot.

The Green Mile
Part Three:
Coffey's Hands
1.
Looking back through what I've written, I see that I called Georgia Pines, where I now live, a nursing
home. The folks who run the place wouldn't be very happy with that! According to the brochures they
keep in the lobby and send out to prospective clients, its a "State-of-the-art retirement complex for the
elderly." It even has a Resource Center - the brochure says so. The folks who have to live here (the
brochure doesn't call us "inmates," but sometimes I do) just call it the TV room.
Folks think I'm stand-offy because I don't go down to the TV room much in the day, but it's the programs
I can't stand, not the folks. Oprah, Ricki Lake, Carnie Wilson, Rolanda - the world is falling down around
our ears, and all these people care for is talking about fucking to women in short skirts and men with
their shirts hanging open. Well, hell - judge not, lest ye be judged, the Bible says, so I'll get down off my
soapbox. It's just that if I wanted to spend time with trailer trash, I'd move two miles down to the Happy
Wheels Motor Court, where the police cars always seem to be headed on Friday and Saturday nights with
their sirens screaming and their blue lights flashing. My special friend, Elaine Connelly, feels the sameway. Elaine is eighty, tall and slim, still erect and clear-eyed, very intelligent and refined. She walks very
slowly because there's something wrong with her hips, and I know that the arthritis in her hands gives her
terrible misery, but she has a beautiful long neck - a swan neck, almost - and long, pretty hair that falls to
her shoulders when she lets it down.
Best of all, she doesn't think I'm peculiar, or stand-offy. We spend a lot of time together, Elaine and I. If I
hadn't reached such a grotesque age, I suppose I might speak of her as my ladyfriend. Still, having a
special friend - just that - is not so bad, and in some ways, it's even better. A lot of the problems and
heartaches that go with being boyfriend and girlfriend have simply burned out of us. And although I
know that no one under the age of, say, fifty would believe this, sometimes the embers are better than the
campfire. It's strange, but it's true.
So I don't watch TV during the day. Sometimes I walk; sometimes I read; mostly what I've been doing
for the last month or so is writing this memoir among the plants in the solarium. I think there's more
oxygen in that room, and it helps the old memory. It beats the hell out of Geraldo Rivera, I can tell you
that.
But when I can't sleep, I sometimes creep downstairs and put on the television. There's no Home Box
Office or anything at Georgia Pines - I guess that's a resource just a wee bit too expensive for our
Resource Center - but we have the basic cable services, and that means we have the American Movie
Channel. That's the one (just in case you don't have the basic cable services yourself) where most of the
films are in black and white and none of the women take their clothes off. For an old fart like me, that's
sort of soothing. There have been a good many nights when I've slipped right off to sleep on the ugly
green sofa in front of the TV while Francis the Talking Mule once more pulls Donald O'Connor's skillet
out of the fire, or John Wayne cleans up Dodge, or Jimmy Cagney calls someone a dirty rat and then
pulls a gun. Some of them are movies I saw with my wife, Janice (not just my ladyfriend but my best
friend), and they calm me. The clothes they wear, the way they walk and talk, even the music on the
soundtrack - all those things calm me. They remind me, I suppose, of when I was a man still walking on
the skin of the world, instead of a moth-eaten relic mouldering away in an old folks' home where many of
the residents wear diapers and rubber pants.
There was nothing soothing about what I saw this morning, though. Nothing at all.
Elaine sometimes joins me for AMC's so-called Early Bird Matinee, which starts at 4:00 a.m. - she
doesn't say much about it, but I know her arthritis hurts her something terrible, and that the drugs they
give her don't help much anymore.
When she came in this morning, gliding like a ghost in her white terrycloth robe, she found me sitting on
the lumpy sofa, bent over the scrawny sticks that used to be legs, and clutching my knees to try and still
the shakes that were running through me like a high wind. I felt cold all over, except for my groin, which
seemed to burn with the ghost of the urinary infection which had so troubled my life in the fall of 1932 -
the fall of John Coffey, Percy Wetmore, and Mr. Jingles, the trained mouse.
The fall of William Wharton, it had been, too.
"Paul!" Elaine cried, and hurried over to me hurried as fast as the rusty nails and ground glass in her hips
would allow, anyway. "Paul, what's wrong?"
"I'll be all right," I said, but the words didn't sound very convincing - they came out all uneven, throughteeth that wanted to chatter. "Just give me a minute or two, I'll be right as rain."
She sat next to me and put her arm around my shoulders. "I'm sure," she said. "But what happened? For
heaven's sake, Paul, you look like you saw a ghost."
I did, I thought, and didn't realize until her eyes widened that I'd said it out loud.
"Not really." I said, and patted her hand (gently - so gently!). "But for a minute. Elaine God!"
"Was it from the time when you were a guard at the prison?" she asked. "The time that you've been
writing about in the solarium?"
I nodded. "I worked on our version of Death Row - "
"I know - "
"Only we called it the Green Mile. Because of the linoleum on the floor. In the fall of '32, we got this
fellow - we got this wildman - named William Wharton. Liked to think of himself as Billy the Kid, even
had it tattooed on his arm. Just a kid, but dangerous. I can still remember what Curtis Anderson - he was
the assistant warden back in those days - wrote about him. 'Crazy-wild and proud of it. Wharton is
nineteen years old, and he just doesn't care.' He'd underlined that part."
The hand which had gone around my shoulders was now rubbing my back. I was beginning to calm. In
that moment I loved Elaine Connelly, and could have kissed her all over her face as I told her so. Maybe
I should have. It's terrible to be alone and frightened at any age, but I think it's worst when you're old.
But I had this other thing on my mind, this load of old and still unfinished business.
"Anyway," I said, "you're right-I've been scribbling about how Wharton came on the block and almost
killed Dean Stanton - One of the guys I worked with back then - when he did."
"How could he do that?" Elaine asked.
"Meanness and carelessness," I said grimly. "Wharton supplied the meanness, and the guards who
brought him in supplied the carelessness. The real mistake was Wharton's wrist-chain - it was a little too
long. When Dean unlocked the door to E Block, Wharton was behind him. There were guards on either
side of him, but Anderson was right - Wild Billy just didn't care about such things. He dropped that
wrist-chain down over Dean's head and started choking him with it."
Elaine shuddered.
"Anyway, I got thinking about all that and couldn't sleep, so I came down here. I turned on AMC,
thinking you might come down and we'd have us a little date-"
She laughed and kissed my forehead just above the eyebrow. It used to make me prickle all over when
Janice did that, and it still made me prickle all over when Elaine did it early this morning. I guess some
things don't ever change.
"-and what came on was this old black-and-white gangster movie from the forties. Kiss of Death, it's
called."
I could feel myself wanting to start shaking again and tried to suppress it."Richard Widmark's in it," I said. "It was his first big part, I think. I never went to see it with Jan - we
gave the cops and robbers a miss, usually - but I remember reading somewhere that Widmark gave one
hell of a performance as the punk. He sure did. He's pale ... doesn't seem to walk so much as go gliding
around ... he's always calling people 'squirt' . . . talking about squealers how much he hates the squealers .
. !"
I was starting to shiver again in spite of my best efforts. I just couldn't help it.
"Blond hair," I whispered. "Lank blond hair. I watched until the part where he pushed this old woman in
a wheelchair down a flight of stairs, then I turned it off."
"He reminded you of Wharton?"
"He was Wharton," I said. "To the life!"
"Paul----!' she began, and stopped. She looked at the blank screen of the TV (the cable box on top of it
was still on, the red numerals still showing 10, the number of the AMC channel), then back at me.
"What?" I asked. 'What, Elaine?" Thinking, She's going to tell, me I ought to quit writing about it. That I
ought to tear up the pages I've written so far and just quit on it.
What she said was "Don't let this stop you!"
I gawped at her.
"Close your mouth, Paul - you'll catch a fly."
"Sorry. It's just that ... well . . ."
"You thought I was going to tell you just the opposite, didn't you?"
"Yes. "
She took my hands in hers (gently, so gently - her long and beautiful fingers, her bunched and ugly
knuckles) and leaned forward, fixing my blue eyes with her hazel ones, the left slightly dimmed by the
mist of a coalescing cataract. "I may be too old and brittle to live," she said, "but I'm not too old to think.
What's a few sleepless nights at our age? What's seeing a ghost on the TV, for that matter? Are you going
to tell me it's the only one you've ever seen?"
I thought about Warden Moores, and Harry Terwilliger, and Brutus Howell; I thought about MY mother,
and about Jan, my wife, who died in Alabama. I knew about ghosts, all right.
"No," I said. "It wasn't the first ghost I've ever seen. But Elaine - it was a shock. Because it was him."
She kissed me again, then stood up, wincing as she did so and pressing the heels of her hands to the tops
of her hips, as if she were afraid they might actually explode out through her skin if she wasn't very
careful.
"I think I've changed my mind about the television," she said. "I've got an extra pill that I've been keeping
for a rainy day ... or night. I think I'll take it and go back to bed. Maybe you should do the same."
"Yes," I said. "I suppose I should!" For one wild moment I thought of suggesting that we go back to bedtogether, and then I saw the dull pain in her eyes and thought better of it. Because she might have said
yes, and she would only have said that for me. Not so good.
We left the TV room (I won't dignify it with that other name, not even to be ironic) side by side, me
matching my steps to hers, which were slow and painfully careful. The building was quiet except for
someone moaning in the grip of a bad dream behind some closed door.
"Will you be able to sleep, do you think?" she asked.
"Yes, I think so," I said, but of course I wasn't able to; I lay in my bed until sunup, thinking about Kiss of
Death. I'd see Richard Widmark, giggling madly, tying the old lady into her wheelchair and then pushing
her down the stairs -"This is what we do to squealers," he told her-and then his face would merge into the
face of William Wharton as he'd looked on the day when he came to E Block and the Green Mile -
Wharton giggling like Widmark, Wharton screaming, Ain't this a pa", now? Is it, or what? I didn't bother
with breakfast, not after that; I just came down here to the solarium and began to write.
Ghosts? Sure.
I know all about ghosts.
2.
"Woooee, boys!" Wharton laughed. "Ain't this a party, now? Is it, or what?"
Still screaming and laughing, Wharton went back to choking Dean with his chain. Why not? Wharton
knew what Dean and Harry and my friend Brutus Howell knew - they could only fry a man once.
"Hit him!" Harry Terwilliger screamed. He had grappled with Wharton, tried to stop things before they
got fairly started, but Wharton had thrown him off and now Harry was trying to find his feet. "Percy, hit
him!"
But Percy only stood there, hickory baton in hand, eyes as wide as soup-plates. He loved that damned
baton of his, and you would have said this was the chance to use it he'd been pining for ever since he
came to Cold Mountain Penitentiary ... but now that it had come, he was too scared to use the
opportunity. This wasn't some terrified little Frenchman like Delacroix or a black giant who hardly
seemed to know he was in his own body, like John Coffey; this was a whirling devil.
I came out of Wharton's cell, dropping my clipboard and pulling my .38. For the second time that day I
had forgotten the infection that was heating up my middle. I didn't doubt the story the others told of
Wharton's blank face and dull eyes when they recounted it later, but that wasn't the Wharton I saw. What
I saw was the face of an animal - not an intelligent animal, but one filled with cunning ... and meanness
... and joy. Yes. He was doing what he had been made to do. The place and the circumstances didn't
matter. The other thing I saw was Dean Stanton's red, swelling face. He was dying in front of my eyes.
Wharton saw the gun in my hand and turned Dean toward it, so that I'd almost certainly have to hit one to
hit the other. From over Dean's shoulder, one blazing blue eye dared me to shoot. Wharton's other eye
was hidden by Dean's hair. Behind them I saw Percy standing irresolute, with his baton half-raised. And
then, filling the open doorway to the prison yard, a miracle in the flesh: Brutus Howell. They had
finished moving the last of the infirmary equipment, and he had come over to see who wanted coffee.
He acted without a moment's hesitation - shoved Percy aside and into the wall with tooth-rattling force,pulled his own baton out of its loop, and brought it crashing down on the back of Wharton's head with all
the force in his massive right arm. There was a dull whock! Sound - an almost hollow sound, as if there
were no brain at all under Wharton's skull - and the chain finally loosened around Dean's neck. Wharton
went down like a sack of meal and Dean crawled away, hacking harshly and holding one hand to his
throat, his eyes bulging.
I knelt by him and he shook his head violently. "Okay," he rasped. "Take care ... him!" He motioned at
Wharton. "Lock! Cell!"
I didn't think he'd need a cell, as hard as Brutal had hit him; I thought he'd need a coffin. No such luck,
though. Wharton was conked out, but a long way from dead. He lay sprawled on his side, one arm
thrown out so that the tips of his fingers touched the linoleum of the Green Mile, his eyes shut, his
breathing slow but regular. There was even a peaceful little smile on his face, as if he'd gone to sleep
listening to his favorite lullaby. A tiny red rill of blood was seeping out of his hair and staining the collar
of his new prison shirt. That was all.
"Percy," I said. "Help me!"
Percy didn't move, only stood against the wall, staring with wide, stunned eyes. I don't think he knew
exactly where he was.
"Percy, goddammit, grab hold of him!"
He got moving, then, and Harry helped him. Together the three of us hauled the unconscious Mr.
Wharton into his cell while Brutal helped Dean to his feet and held him as gently as any mother while
Dean bent over and hacked air back into his lungs.
Our new problem child didn't wake up for almost three hours, but when he did, he showed absolutely no
ill effects from Brutal's savage hit. He came to the way he moved - fast. At one moment he was lying on
his bunk, dead to the world. At the next he was standing at the bars - he was silent as a cat - and staring
out at me as I sat at the duty desk, writing a report on the incident. When I finally sensed someone
looking at me and glanced up, there he was, his grin displaying a set of blackening, dying teeth with
several gaps among them already. It gave me a jump to see him there like that. I tried not to show it, but I
think he knew. "Hey, flunky," he said. "Next time it'll be you. And I won't miss."
"Hello, Wharton," I said, as evenly as I could. "Under the circumstances, I guess I can skip the speech
and the Welcome Wagon, don't you think?"
His grin faltered just a little. It wasn't the sort of response he had expected, and probably wasn't the one I
would have given under other circumstances. But something had happened while Wharton was
unconscious. It is, I suppose, one of the major things I have trudged through all these pages to tell you
about. Now let's just see if you believe it.
3.
Except for shouting once at Delacroix, Percy kept his mouth shut once the excitement was over. This was
probably the result of shock rather than any effort at tact - Percy Wetmore knew as much about tact as I
do about the native tribes of darkest Africa, in my opinion - but it was a damned good thing, just the
same. If he'd started in whining about how Brutal had pushed him into the wall or wondering why no one
had told him that nasty men like Wild Billy Wharton sometimes turned up on E Block, I think we wouldhave killed him. Then we could have toured the Green Mile in a whole new way. That's sort of a funny
idea, when you consider it. I missed my chance to make like James Cagney in White Heat.
Anyway, when we were sure that Dean was going to keep breathing and that he wasn't going to pass out
on the spot, Harry and Brutal escorted him over to the infirmary. Delacroix, who had been absolutely
silent during the scuffle (he had been in prison lots of times, that one, and knew when it was prudent to
keep his yap shut and when it was relatively safe to open it again), began bawling loudly down the
corridor as Harry and Brutal helped Dean out. Delacroix wanted to know what had happened. You would
have thought his constitutional rights had been violated.
"Shut up, you little queer!" Percy yelled back, so furious that the veins stood out on the sides of his neck.
I put a hand on his arm and felt it quivering beneath his shirt. Some of this was residual fright, of course
(every now and then I had to remind myself that part of Percy's problem was that he was only
twenty-one, not much older than Wharton), but I think most of it was rage. He hated Delacroix. I don't
know just why, but he did.
"Go see if Warden Moores is still here," I told Percy. "If he is, give him a complete verbal report on what
happened. Tell him he'll have my written report on his desk tomorrow, if I can manage it."
Percy swelled visibly at this responsibility; for a horrible moment or two, I actually thought he might
salute. "Yes, sir. I will."
"Begin by telling him that the situation in E Block is normal. It's not a story, and the warden won't
appreciate you dragging it out to heighten the suspense."
"I won't."
"Okay. Off you go."
He started for the door, then turned back. The one thing you could count on with him was contrariness. I
desperately wanted him gone, my groin was on fire, and now he didn't seem to want to go.
"Are you all right, Paul?" he asked. "Running a fever, maybe? Got a touch of the grippe? Cause there's
sweat all over your face."
"I might have a touch of something, but mostly I'm fine," I said. "Go on, Percy, tell the warden."
He nodded and left - thank Christ for small favors. As soon as the door was closed, I lunged into my
office. Leaving the duty desk unmanned was against regulations, but I was beyond caring about that. It
was bad - like it had been that morning.
I managed to get into the little toilet cubicle behind the desk and to get my business out of my pants
before the urine started to gush, but it was a near thing. I had to put a hand over my mouth to stifle a
scream as I began to flow, and grabbed blindly for the lip of the washstand with the other. It wasn't like
my house, where I could fall to my knees and piss a puddle beside the woodpile; if I went to my knees
here, the urine would go all over the floor.
I managed to keep my feet and not to scream, but it was a close thing on both counts. It felt like my urine
had been filled with tiny slivers of broken glass. The smell coming up from the toilet bowl was swampy
and unpleasant, and I could see white stuff - pus, I guess - floating on the surface of the water.I took the towel off the rack and wiped my face with it. I was sweating, all right; it was pouring off me. I
looked into the metal mirror and saw the flushed face of a man running a high fever looking back at me.
Hundred and three? Hundred and four?
Better not to know, maybe. I put the towel back on its bar, flushed the toilet, and walked slowly back
across my office to the cellblock door. I was afraid Bill Dodge or someone else might have come in and
seen three prisoners with no attendants, but the place was empty. Wharton still lay unconscious on his
bunk, Delacroix had fallen silent, and John Coffey had never made a single noise at all, I suddenly
realized. Not a peep. Which was worrisome.
I went down the Mile and glanced into Coffey's cell, half-expecting to discover he'd committed suicide in
one of the two common Death Row ways either hanging himself with his pants, or gnawing into his
wrists. No such thing, it turned out. Coffey merely sat on the end of his bunk with his hands in his lap,
the largest man I'd ever seen in my life, looking at me with his strange, wet eyes.
"Cap'n?" he said.
"What's up, big boy?"
"I need to see you."
"Ain't you looking right at me, John Coffey?"
He said nothing to this, only went on studying me with his strange, leaky gaze. I sighed.
"In a second, big boy."
I looked over at Delacroix, who was standing at the bars of his cell. Mr. Jingles, his pet mouse (Delacroix
would tell you he'd trained Mr. Jingles to do tricks, but us folks who worked on the Green Mile were
pretty much unanimous in the opinion that Mr. Jingles had trained himself), was jumping restlessly back
and forth from one of Del's outstretched hands to the other, like an acrobat doing leaps from platforms
high above the center ring. His eyes were huge, his ears laid back against his sleek brown skull. I hadn't
any doubt that the mouse was reacting to Delacroix's nerves. As I watched, he ran down Delacroix's
pants leg and across the cell to where the brightly colored spool lay against one wall. He pushed the
spool back to Delacroix's foot and then looked up at him eagerly, but the little Cajun took no notice of his
friend, at least for the time being.
"What happen, boss?" Delacroix asked. "Who been hurt?"
"Everything's jake," I said. "Our new boy came in like a lion, but now he's passed out like a lamb. All's
well that ends well."
"It ain't over yet," Delacroix said, looking up the Mile toward the cell where Wharton was jugged.
"L'homme mauvais, c'est"
"Well," I said, "don't let it get you down, Del. Nobody's going to make you play skiprope with him out in
the yard."
There was a creaking sound from behind me as Coffey got off his bunk. "Boss Edgecombe!" he said
again. This time he sounded urgent. "I need to talk to you!"I turned to him, thinking, all right, no problem, talking was my business. All the time trying not to shiver,
because the fever had turned cold, as they sometimes will. Except for my groin, which still felt as if it
had been slit open, filled with hot coals, and then sewed back up again."So talk, John Coffey," I said, trying to keep my voice light and calm. For the first time since he'd come
onto E Block, Coffey looked as though he was really here, really among us. The almost ceaseless trickle
of tears from the corners of his eyes had ceased, at least for the time being, and I knew he was seeing
what he was looking at - Mr. Paul Edgecombe, E Block's bull-goose screw, and not some place he
wished he could return to, and take back the terrible thing he'd done."No," he said. "You got to come in here."
"Now, you know I can't do that," I said, still trying for the light tone, "at least not right this minute. I'm
on my own here for the time being, and you outweigh me by just about a ton and a half. We've had us
one hooraw this afternoon, and that's enough. So we'll just have us a chat through the bars, if it's all the
same to you, and - "
"Please!" He was holding the bars so tightly that his knuckles were pale and his fingernails were white.
His face was long with distress, those strange eyes sharp with some need I could not understand. I
remember thinking that maybe I could've understood it if I hadn't been so sick, and knowing that would
have given me a way of helping him through the rest of it. When you know what a man needs, you know
the man, more often than not. "Please, Boss Edgecombe! You have to come in!"
That's the nuttiest thing I ever heard, I thought, and then realized something even nuttier: I was going to
do it. I had my keys off my belt and I was hunting through them for the ones that opened John Coffey's
cell. He could have picked me up and broken me over his knee like kindling on a day when I was well
and feeling fine, and this wasn't that day. All the same, I was going to do it. On my own, and less than
half an hour after a graphic demonstration of where stupidity and laxness could get you when you were
dealing with condemned murderers, I was going to open this black giant's cell, go in, and sit with him. If
I was discovered, I might well lose my job even if he didn't do anything crazy, but I was going to do it,
just the same.
Stop, I said to myself, you just stop now, Paul. But I didn't. I used one key on the top lock, another on the
bottom lock, and then I slid the door back on its track.
"You know, boss, that maybe not such a good idear," Delacroix said in a voice so nervous and prissy it
would probably have made me laugh under other circumstances.
"You mind your business and I'll mind mine," I said without looking around. My eyes were fixed on John
Coffey's, and fixed so hard they might have been nailed there. It was like being hypnotized. My voice
sounded to my own ears like something which had come echoing down a long valley. Hell, maybe I was
hypnotized. "You just lie down and take you a rest."
"Christ, this place is crazy," Delacroix said in a trembling voice. "Mr. Jingles, I just about wish they'd fry
me and be done widdit!"
I went into Coffey's cell. He stepped away as I stepped forward. When he was backed up against his
bunk - it hit him in the calves, that's how tall he was - he sat down on it. He patted the mattress beside
him, his eyes never once leaving mine. I sat down there next to him, and he put his arm around myshoulders, as if we were at the movies and I was his girl.
"What do you want, John Coffey?" I asked, still looking into his eyes - those sad, serene eyes.
"Just to help," he said. He sighed like a man will when he's faced with a job he doesn't much want to do,
and then he put his hand down in my crotch, on that shelf of bone a foot or so below the navel.
"Hey!" I cried. "Get your goddam hand---"
A jolt slammed through me then, a big painless whack of something. It made me jerk on the cot and bow
my back, made me think of Old Toot shouting that he was frying, he was frying, he was a done tom
turkey. There was no heat, no feeling of electricity, but for a moment the color seemed to jump out of
everything, as if the world had been somehow squeezed and made to sweat. I could see every pore on
john Coffey's face, I could see every bloodshot snap in his haunted eyes, I could see a tiny healing scrape
on his chin. I was aware that my fingers were hooked down into claws on thin air, and that my feet were
drumming on the floor of Coffey's cell.
Then it was over. So was my urinary infection. Both the heat and the miserable throbbing pain were gone
from my crotch, and the fever was likewise gone from my head. I could still feel the sweat it had drawn
out of my skin, and I could smell it, but it was gone, all right.
"What's going on?" Delacroix called shrilly. His voice still came from far away, but when John Coffey
bent forward, breaking eye-contact with me, the little Cajun's voice suddenly came clear. It was as if
someone had pulled wads of cotton or a pair of shooters' plugs out of my ears. "What's he doing to you?"
I didn't answer. Coffey was bent forward over his own lap with his face working and his throat bulging.
His eyes were bulging, too. He looked like a man with a chicken bone caught in his throat.
"John!" I said. I clapped him on the back; it was all I could think of to do. "John, what's wrong?"
He hitched under my hand, then made an unpleasant gagging, retching sound. His mouth opened the way
horses sometimes open their mouths to allow the bit - reluctantly, with the lips peeling back from the
teeth in a kind of desperate sneer. Then his teeth parted, too, and he exhaled a cloud of tiny black insects
that looked like gnats or noseeums. They swirled furiously between his knees, turned white, and
disappeared.
Suddenly all the strength went out of my middsection. It was as if the muscles there had turned to water.
I slumped back against the stone side of Coffey's cell. I remember thinking the name of the Savior -
Christ, Christ, Christ, over and over, like that - and I remember thinking that the fever had driven me
delirious. That was all.
Then I became aware that Delacroix was bawling for help; he was telling the world that John Coffey was
killing me, and telling it at the top of his lungs. Coffey was bending over me, all right, but only to make
sure I was okay.
"Shut up, Del," I said, and got on my feet. I waited for the pain to rip into my guts, but it didn't happen. I
was better. Really. There was a moment of dizziness, but that passed even before I was able to reach out
and grab the bars of Coffey's cell door for balance. "I'm totally okey-doke."
"You get on outta here," Delacroix said, sounding like a nervy old woman telling a kid to climb down outof that-ere apple tree. "You ain't suppose to be in there wit no one else on the block."
I looked at John Coffey, who sat on the bunk with his huge hands on the tree stumps of his knees. John
Coffey looked back at me. He had to tilt his head up a little, but not much.
"What did you do, big boy?" I asked in a low voice. "What did you do to me?"
"Helped," he said. "I helped it, didn't I?"
"Yeah, I guess, but how? How did you help it?"
He shook his head - right, left, back to dead center. He didn't know how he'd helped it (how he'd cured it)
and his placid face suggested that he didn't give a rat's ass - any more than I'd give a rat's ass about the
mechanics of running when I was leading in the last fifty yards of a Fourth of July Two-Miler. I thought
about asking him how he'd known I was sick in the first place, except that would undoubtedly have
gotten the same headshake. There's a phrase I read somewhere and never forgot, something about "an
enigma wrapped in a mystery." That's what John Coffey was, and I suppose the only reason he could
sleep at night was because he didn't care. Percy called him the ijit, which was cruel but not too far off the
mark. Our big boy knew his name, and knew it wasn't spelled like the drink, and that was just about all
he cared to know.
As if to emphasize this for me, he shook his head m that deliberate way one more time, then lay down on
his bunk with his hands clasped under his left cheek like a pillow and his face to the wall. His legs
dangled off the end of the bunk from the shins on down, but that never seemed to bother him. The back
of his shirt had pulled up, and I could see the scars that crisscrossed his skin.
I left the cell, turned the locks, then faced Delacroix, who was standing across the way with his hands
wrapped around the bars of his cell, looking at me anxiously. Perhaps even fearfully. Mr. Jingles perched
on his shoulder with his fine whiskers quivering like filaments. "What dat darkie-man do to you?"
Delacroix asked. "Waddit gris-gris? He th'ow some gris-gris on you?" Spoken in that Cajun accent of his,
gris-gris rhymed with pee-pee.
"I don't know what you're talking about, Del."
"Devil you don't! Lookit you! All change! Even walk different, boss!"
I probably was walking different, at that. There was a beautiful feeling of calm in my groin, a sense of
peace so remarkable it was almost eestasy - anyone who's suffered bad pain and then recovered will
know what I'm talking about.
"Everything's all right, Del," I insisted. "John Coffey had a nightmare, that's all."
"He a gris-gris man!" Delacroix said vehemently. There was a nestle of sweat-beads on his upper lip. He
hadn't seen much, just enough to scare him half to death. "He a hoodoo man!"
"What makes you say that?"
Delacroix reached up and took the mouse in one hand. He cupped it in his palm and lifted it to his face.
From his pocket, Delacroix took out a pink fragment - one of those peppermint candies. He held it out,
but at first the mouse ignored it, stretching out its neck toward the man instead, sniffing at his breath the
way a person might sniff at a bouquet of flowers. Its little oildrop eyes slitted most of the way closed inan expression that looked like ecstasy. Delacroix kissed its nose, and the mouse allowed its nose to bekissed. Then it took the offered piece of candy and began to munch it. Delacroix looked at it a moment
longer, then looked at me. All at once I got it.
"The mouse told you," I said. "Am I right?"
"Oui."
"Like he whispered his name to you."
"Oui, in my ear he whisper it."
"Lie down, Del," I said. "Have you a little rest. All that whispering back and forth must wear you out."
He said something else-accused me of not believing him, I suppose. His voice seemed to be coming from
a long way off again. And when I went back up to the duty desk, I hardly seemed to be walking at all - it
was more like I was floating, or maybe not even moving, the cells just rolling past me on either side,
movie props on hidden wheels.
I started to sit like normal, but halfway into it my knees unlocked and I dropped onto the blue cushion
Harry had brought from home the year before and plopped onto the seat of the chair. If the chair hadn't
been there, I reckon I would have plopped straight to the floor without passing Go or collecting two
hundred dollars.
I sat there, feeling the nothing in my groin where a forest fire had been blazing not ten minutes before. I
helped it, didn't I? John Coffey had said, and that was true, as far as my body went. My peace of mind
was a different story, though. That he hadn't helped at all.
My eyes fell on the stack of forms under the tin ashtray we kept on the corner of the desk. BLOCK
REPORT was printed at the top, and about halfway down was a blank space headed Report All Unusual
Occurrences. I would use that space in tonight's report, telling the story of William Wharton's colorful
and action-packed arrival. But suppose I also told what had happened to me in John Coffey's cell? I saw
myself picking up the pencil - the one whose tip Brutal was always licking - and writing a single word in
big capital letters: MIRACLE.
That should have been funny, but instead of smiling, all at once I felt sure that I was going to cry I put my
hands to my face, palms against my mouth to stifle the sobs - I didn't want to scare Del again just when
he was starting to get settled down - but no sobs came. No tears, either. After a few moments I lowered
my hands back to the desk and folded them. I didn't know what I was feeling, and the only clear thought
in my head was a wish that no one should come back onto the block until I was a little more in control of
myself. I was afraid of what they might see in my face.
I drew a Block Report form toward me. I would wait until I had settled down a bit more to write about
how my latest problem child had almost strangled Dean Stanton, but I could fill out the rest of the
boilerplate foolishness in the meantime. I thought my handwriting might look funny - trembly - but it
came out about the same as always.
About five minutes after I started, I put the pencil down and went into the W.C. adjacent to my office to
take a leak. I didn't need to go very bad, but I could manage enough to test what had happened to me, I
thought. As I stood there, waiting for my water to flow, I became sure that it would hurt just the way ithad that morning, as if I were passing tiny shards of broken glass; what he'd done to me would turn out to
be only hypnosis, after all, and that might be a relief in spite of the pain.
Except there was no pain, and what went into the bowl was clear, with no sign of pus. I buttoned my fly,
pulled the chain that flushed the commode, went back to the duty desk, and sat down again.
I knew what had happened; I suppose I knew even when I was trying to tell myself I'd been hypnotized.
I'd experienced a healing, an authentic Praise Jesus, The Lord Is Mighty. As a boy who'd grown up going
to whatever Baptist or Pentecostal church my mother and her sisters happened to be in favor of during
any given month, I had heard plenty of Praise Jesus, The Lord Is Mighty miracle stories. I didn't believe
all of them, but there were plenty of people I did believe. One of these was a man named Roy Delfines,
who lived with his family about two miles down the road from us when I was six or so. Delfines had
chopped his son's little finger off with a hatchet, an accident which had occurred when the boy
unexpectedly moved his hand on a log he'd been holding on the backyard chopping block for his dad.
Roy Delfines said he had practically worn out the carpet with his knees that fall and winter, and in the
spring the boy's finger had grown back. Even the nail had grown back. I believed Roy Delfines when he
testified at Thursday-night rejoicing. There was a naked, uncomplicated honesty in what he said as he
stood there talking with his hands jammed deep into the pockets of his biballs that was impossible not to
believe. "It itch him some when thet finger started coming, kep him awake nights," Roy Delfines said,
"but he knowed it was the Lord's itch and let it be." Praise Jesus, The Lord Is Mighty.
Roy Delfines's story was only one of many; I grew up in a tradition of miracles and healings. I grew up
believing in gris-gris, as well (only, up in the hills we said it to rhyme with kiss-kiss): stump-water for
warts, moss under your pillow to ease the heartache of lost love, and, of course, what we used to call
haints - but I did not believe John Coffey was a gris-gris man. I had looked into his eyes. More
important,' I had felt his touch. Being touched by him was like being touched by some strange and
wonderful doctor.
I helped it, didn't I?
That kept chiming in my head, like a snatch of song you can't get rid of, or words you'd speak to set a
spell.
I helped it, didn't I?
Except he hadn't. God had. John Coffey's use of "I" could be chalked up to ignorance rather than pride,
but I knew - believed, at least - what I had learned about healing in those churches of Praise Jesus, The
Lord Is Mighty, piney-woods amen corners much beloved by my twenty-two-year-old mother and my
aunts: that healing is never about the healed or the healer, but about God's will. For one to rejoice at the
sick made well is normal, quite the expected thing, but the person healed has an obligation to then ask
why - to meditate on God's will, and the extraordinary lengths to which God has gone to realize His will.
What did God want of me, in this case? What did He want badly enough to put healing power in the
hands of a child-murderer? To be on the block, instead of at home, sick as a dog, shivering in bed with
the stink of sulfa running out of my pores? Perhaps; I was maybe supposed to be here instead of home in
case Wild Bill Wharton decided to kick up more dickens, or to make sure Percy Wetmore didn't get up to
some foolish and potentially destructive piece of fuckery All right, then. So be it. I would keep my eyes
open - and my mouth shut, especially about miracle cures.No one was apt to question my looking and sounding better; I'd been telling the world I was getting
better, and until that very day I'd honestly believed it. I had even told Warden Moores that I was on the
mend. Delacroix had seen something, but I thought he would keep his mouth shut, too (probably afraid
John Coffey would throw a spell on him if he didn't). As for Coffey himself, he'd probably already
forgotten it. He was nothing but a conduit, after all, and there isn't a culvert in the world that remembers
the water that flowed through it once the rain has stopped. So I resolved to keep my mouth completely
shut on the subject, with never an idea of how soon I'd be telling the story, or who I'd be telling it to.
But I was curious about my big boy, and there's no sense not admitting it. After what had happened to me
there in his cell, I was more curious than ever.
4.
Before leaving that night, I arranged with Brutal to cover for me the next day, should I come in a little
late, and when I got up the following morning, I set out for Tefton, down in Trapingus County.
"I'm not sure I like you worrying so much about this fellow Coffey," my wife said, handing me the lunch
she'd put up for me-Janice never believed in roadside hamburger stands; she used to say there was a
bellyache waiting in every one. "It's not like you, Paul."
"I'm not worried about him," I said. "I'm curious, that's all."
"In my experience, one leads to the other," Janice said tartly, then gave me a good, hearty kiss on the
mouth. "You look better, at least, I'll say that. For awhile there, you had me nervous. Waterworks all
cured up?"
"All cured up," I said, and off I went, singing songs like "Come, Josephine, in My Flying Machine" and
'We're in the Money" to keep myself company.
I went to the offices of the Tefton Intelligencer first, and they told me that Burt Hammersmith, the fellow
I was looking for, was most likely over at the county courthouse. At the courthouse they told me that
Hammersmith had been there but had left when a burst waterpipe had closed down the main proceedings,
which happened to be a rape trial (in the pages of the Intelligencer the crime would be referred to as
"assault on a woman," which was how such things were done in the days before Ricki Lake and Carnie
Wilson came on the scene). They guessed he'd probably gone on home. I got some directions out a dirt
road so rutted and narrow I just about didn't dare take my Ford up it, and there I found my man.
Hammersmith had written most of the stories on the Coffey trial, and it was from him I found out most of
the details about the brief manhunt that had netted Coffey in the first place. The details the Intelligencer
considered too gruesome to print is what I mean, of course.
Mrs. Hammersmith was a young woman with a tired, pretty face and hands red from lye soap. She didn't
ask my business, just led me through a small house fragrant with the smell of baking and onto the back
porch, where her husband sat with a bottle of pop in his hand and an unopened copy of Liberty magazine
on his lap. There was a small, sloping backyard; at the foot of it, two little ones were squabbling and
laughing over a swing. From the porch, it was impossible to tell their sexes, but I thought they were boy
and girl. Maybe even twins, which cast an interesting sort of light on their father's part, peripheral as it
had been, in the Coffey trial. Nearer at hand, set like an island in the middle of a turdstudded patch of
bare, beatup-looking ground, was a doghouse. No sign of Fido; it was another unseasonably hot day, and
I guessed he was probably inside, snoozing."Burt, yew-all got you a cump'ny," Mrs. Hammersmith said.
"Allright," he said. He glanced at me, glanced at his wife, then looked back at his kids, which was where
his heart obviously lay. He was a thin man - almost painfully thin, as if he had just begun to recover from
a serious illness - and his hair had started to recede. His wife touched his shoulder tentatively with one of
her red, wash-swollen hands. He didn't look at it or reach up to touch it, and after a moment she took it
back. It occurred to me, fleetingly, that they looked more like brother and sister than husband and wife -
he'd gotten the brains, she'd gotten the looks, but neither of them had escaped some underlying
resemblance, a heredity that could never be escaped. Later, going home, I realized they didn't look alike
at all; what made them seem to was the aftermath of stress and the lingering of sorrow. It's strange how
pain marks our faces, and makes us look like family.
She said, "Yew-all want a cold drink, Mr. - ?"
"It's Edgecombe," I said. "Paul Edgecombe. And thank you. A cold drink would be wonderful, ma'am."
She went back inside. I held out my hand to Hammersmith, who gave it a brief shake. His grip was limp
and cold. He never took his eyes off the kids down at the bottom of the yard.
"Mr. Hammersmith, I'm E Block superintendent at Cold Mountain State Prison. That's-"
"I know what it is," he said, looking at me with a little more interest. "So - the bull-goose screw of the
Green Mile is standing on my back porch, just as big as life. What brings you fifty miles to talk to the
local rag's only full-time reporter?"
"John Coffey," I said.
I think I expected some sort of strong reaction (the kids who could have been twins working at the back
of my mind - and perhaps the doghouse, too; the Dettericks had had a dog), but Hammersmith only
raised his eyebrows and sipped at his drink. "Coffey's your problem now, isn't he?" Hammersmith asked.
"He's not much of a problem," I said. "He doesn't like the dark, and he cries a lot of the time, but neither
thing makes much of a problem in our line of work. We see worse."
"Cries a lot, does he?" Hammersmith asked. "Well, he's got a lot to cry about, I'd say. Considering what
he did. What do you want to know?"
"Anything you can tell me. I've read your newspaper stories, so I guess what I want is anything that
wasn't in them."
He gave me a sharp, dry look. "Like how the little girls looked? Like exactly what he did to them?"
"That the kind of stuff you're interested in, Mr. Edgecombe?"
"No," I said, keeping my voice mild. "It's not the Detterick girls I'm interested in, sir. Poor little mites are
dead. But Coffey's not - not yet - and I'm curious about him."
"All right," he said. "Pull up a chair and sit, Mr. Edgecombe. You'll forgive me if I sounded a little sharp
just now, but I get to see plenty of vultures in my line of work. Hell, I've been accused of being one of
em often enough, myself. I just wanted to make sure of you.""And are you?"
"Sure enough, I guess," he said, sounding almost indifferent. The story he told me is pretty much the one
I set down earlier in this account - how Mrs. Detterick found the porch empty, with the screen door
pulled off its upper hinge, the blankets cast into one corner, and blood on the steps; how her son and
husband had taken after the girls' abductor; how the posse had caught up to them first and to John Coffey
not much later. How Coffey had been sitting on the riverbank and wailing, with the bodies curled in his
massive arms like big dolls. The reporter, rack-thin in his open-collared white shirt and gray town pants,
spoke in a low, unemotional voice - but his eyes never left his own two children as they squabbled and
laughed and took turns with the swing down there in the shade at the foot of the slope. Sometime in the
middle of the story, Mrs. Hammersmith came back with a bottle of homemade root beer, cold and strong
and delicious. She stood listening for awhile, then interrupted long enough to call down to the kids and
tell them to come up directly, she had cookies due out of the oven. "We will, Mamma!" called a little
girl's voice, and the woman went back inside again.
When Hammersmith had finished, he said: "So why do you want to know? I never had me a visit from a
Big House screw before, it's a first."
"I told you - "
"Curiosity, yep. Folks get curious, I know it, I even thank God for it, I'd be out of a job and might
actually have to go to work for a living without it. But fifty miles is a long way to come to satisfy simple
curiosity, especially when the last twenty is over bad roads. So why don't you tell me the truth,
Edgecombe? I satisfied yours, so now you satisfy mine."
Well, I could say, I had this urinary infection, and John Coffey put his hands on me and healed it. The
man who raped and murdered those two little girls did that. So I wondered about him, of course - anyone
would. I even wondered if maybe Homer Cribus and Deputy Rob McGee didn't maybe collar the wrong
man. In spite of all the evidence against him I wonder that. Because a man who has a power like that in
his hands, you don't usually think of him as the kind of man who rapes and murders children.
No, maybe that wouldn't do.
"There are two things I've wondered about," I said. "The first is if he ever did anything like that before."
Hammersmith turned to me, his eyes suddenly sharp and bright with interest, and I saw he was a smart
fellow. Maybe even a brilliant fellow, in a quiet way. "Why?" he asked. "What do you know,
Edgecombe? What has he said?"
"Nothing. But a man who does this sort of thing once has usually done it before. They get a taste for it."
"Yes," he said. "They do. They certainly do."
"And it occurred to me that it would be easy enough to follow his backtrail and find out. A man his size,
and a Negro to boot, can't be that hard to trace."
"You'd think so, but you'd be wrong," he said. "In Coffey's case, anyhow. I know."
"You tried?"
"I did, and came up all but empty. There were a couple of railroad fellows who thought they saw him inthe Knoxville yards two days before the Detterick girls were killed. No surprise there; he was just acrossthe river from the Great Southern tracks when they collared him, and that's probably how he came down
here from Tennessee. I got a letter from a man who said he'd hired a big bald black man to shift crates for
him in the early spring of this year - this as in Kentucky. I sent him a picture of Coffey and he said that
was the man. But other than that -" Hammersmith shrugged and shook his head.
"Doesn't that strike you as a little odd?"
"Strikes me as a lot odd, Mr. Edgecombe. It's like he dropped out of the sky. And he's no help; he can't
remember last week once this week comes."
"No, he can't," I said. "How do you explain it?"
"We're in a Depression," he said, "that's how I explain it. People all over the roads. The Okies want to
pick peaches in California, the poor whites from up in the brakes want to build cars in Detroit, the black
folks from Mississippi want to go up to New England and work in the shoe factories or the textile mills.
Everyone - black as well as white - thinks it's going to be better over the next jump of land. It's the
American damn way. Even a giant like Coffey doesn't get noticed everywhere he goes - until, that is, he
decides to kill a couple of little girls. Little white girls."
"Do you believe that?" I asked.
He gave me a bland look from his too-thin face. "Sometimes I do," he said.
His wife leaned out of the kitchen window like an engineer from the cab of a locomotive and called,
"Kids! Cookies are ready!" She turned to me. "Would you like an oatmeal-raisin cookie, Mr.
Edgecombe?"
"I'm sure they're delicious, ma'am, but I'll take a pass this time."
"All right," she said, and drew her head back inside.
"Have you seen the scars on him?" Hammersmith asked abruptly. He was still watching his kids, who
couldn't quite bring themselves to abandon the pleasures of the swing - not even for oatmeal-raisin
cookies.
"Yes." But I was surprised he had.
He saw my reaction and laughed. "The defense attorney's one big victory was getting Coffey to take off
his shirt and show those scars to the jury. The prosecutor, George Peterson, objected like hell, but the
judge allowed it. Old George could have saved, his breath - juries around these parts don't buy all that
psychology crap about how people who've been mistreated just can't help themselves. They believe
people can help themselves. It's a point of view I have a lot of sympathy for - but those scars were pretty
ghastly, just the same. Notice anything about them, Edgecombe?"
I had seen the man naked in the shower, and I'd noticed, all right; I knew just what he was talking about.
"They're all broken up. Latticed, almost."
"You know what that means?"
"Somebody whopped the living hell out of him when he was a kid," I said. "Before he grew.""But they didn't manage to whop the devil out of him, did they, Edgecombe? Should have spared the rod
and just drowned him in the river like a stray kitten, don't you think?"I suppose it would have been politic to simply agree and get out of there, but I couldn't. I'd seen him. And
I'd felt him, as well. Felt the touch of his hands.
"He's ... strange," I said. "But there doesn't seem to be any real violence in him. I know how he was
found, and it's hard to jibe that with what I see, day in and day out, on the block. I know violent men, Mr.
Hammersmith." It was Wharton I was thinking about, of course, Wharton strangling Dean Stanton with
his wrist-chain and bellowing Whoooee, boys! Ain't this a party, now?
He was looking at me closely now, and smiling a little, incredulous smile that I didn't care for very much.
"You didn't come up here to get an idea about whether or not he might have killed some other little girls
somewhere else," he said. "You came up here to see if I think he did it at all. That's it, isn't it? 'Fess up,
Edgecombe."
I swallowed the last of my cold drink, put the bottle down on the little table, and said: "Well? Do you?"
"Kids!" he called down the hill, leaning forward a little in his chair to do it. "Y'all come on up here now n
get your cookies!" Then he leaned back in his chair again and looked at me. That little smile - the one I
didn't much care for - had reappeared.
"Tell you something," he said. "You want to listen close, too, because this might just be something you
need to know."
"I'm listening."
"We had us a dog named Sir Galahad," he said, and cocked a thumb at the doghouse. "A good dog. No
particular breed, but gentle. Calm. Ready to lick your hand or fetch a stick. There are plenty of mongrel
dogs like him, wouldn't you say?"
I shrugged, nodded.
"In many ways, a good mongrel dog is like your negro," he said. "You get to know it, and often you grow
to love it. It is of no particular use, but you keep it around because you think it loves you. If you're lucky,
Mr. Edgecombe, you never have to find out any different. Cynthia and I, we were not lucky." He sighed -
a long and somehow skeletal sound, like the wind rummaging through fallen leaves. He pointed toward
the doghouse again, and I wondered how I had missed its general air of abandonment earlier, or the fact
that many of the turds had grown whitish and powdery at their tops.
"I used to clean up after him," Hammersmith said, "and keep the roof of his house repaired against the
rain. In that way also Sir Galahad was like your Southern negro, who will not do those things for himself.
Now I don't touch it, I haven't been near it since the accident - if you can call it an accident. I went over
there with my rifle and shot him, but I haven't been over there since. I can't bring myself to. I suppose I
will, in time. I'll clean up his messes and tear down his house."
Here came the kids, and all at once I didn't want them to come; all at once that was the last thing on earth
I wanted. The little girl was all right, but the boy -
They pounded up the steps, looked at me, giggled, then went on toward the kitchen door."Caleb," Hammersmith said. "Come here. Just for a second."
The little girl - surely his twin, they had to be of an age - went on into the kitchen. The little boy came to
his father, looking down at his feet. He knew he was ugly. He was only four, I guess, but four is old
enough to know that you're ugly. His father put two fingers under the boy's chin and tried to raise his
face. At first the boy resisted, but when his father said "Please, son," in tones of sweetness and calmness
and love, he did as he was asked.
A huge, circular scar ran out of his hair, down his forehead, through one dead and indifferently cocked
eye, and to the comer of his mouth, which had been disfigured into the knowing leer of a gambler or
perhaps a whoremaster. One cheek was smooth and pretty; the other was bunched up like the stump of a
tree. I guessed there had been a hole in it, but that, at least, had healed.
"He has the one eye," Hammersmith said, caressing the boy's bunched cheek with a lover's kind fingers.
"I suppose he's lucky not to be blind. We get down on our knees and thank God for that much, at least.
Eh, Caleb?"
"Yes, sir," the boy said shyly - the boy who would be beaten mercilessly on the play-yard by laughing,
jeering bullies for all his miserable years of education, the boy who would never be asked to play Spin
the Bottle or Post Office and would probably never sleep with a woman not bought and paid for once he
was grown to manhood's times and needs, the boy who would always stand outside the warm and lighted
circle of his peers, the boy who would look at himself in his mirror for the next fifty or sixty or seventy
years of his life and think ugly, ugly, ugly.
"Go on in and get your cookies," his father said, and kissed his son's sneering mouth.
"Yes, sir," Caleb, said, and dashed inside.
Hammersmith took a handkerchief from his back pocket and wiped at his eyes with it - they were dry,
but I suppose he'd gotten used to them being wet.
"The dog was here when they were born," he said. "I brought him in the house to smell them when
Cynthia brought them home from the hospital, and Sir Galahad licked their hands. Their little hands." He
nodded, as if confirming this to himself. "He played with them; used to lick Arden's face until she
giggled. Caleb used to pull his ears, and when he was first learning to walk, he'd sometimes go around
the yard, holding to Galahad's tail. The dog never so much as growled at him. Either of them."
Now the tears were coming; he wiped at them automatically, as a man does when he's had lots of
practice.
"There was no reason," he said. "Caleb didn't hurt him, yell at him, anything. I know. I was there. If I
hadn't have been, the boy would almost certainly have been killed. What happened, Mr. Edgecombe, was
nothing. The boy just got his face set the right way in front of the dog's face, and it came into Sir
Galahad's mind - whatever serves a dog for a mind - to lunge and bite. To kill, if he could. The boy was
there in front of him and the dog bit. And that's what happened with Coffey. He was there, he saw them
on the porch, he took them, he raped them, he killed them. You say there should be some hint that he did
something like it before, and I know what you mean, but maybe he didn't do it before. My dog never bit
before; just that once. Maybe, if Coffey was let go, he'd never do it again. Maybe my dog never would
have bit again. But I didn't concern myself with that, you know. I went out with my rifle and grabbed hiscollar and blew his head off."
He was breathing hard.
"I'm as enlightened as the next man, Mr. Edgecombe, went to college in Bowling Green, took history as
well as journalism, some philosophy, too. I like to think of myself as enlightened. I don't suppose folks
up North would, but I like to think of myself as enlightened. I'd not bring slavery back for all the tea in
China. I think we have to be humane and generous in our efforts to solve the race problem. But we have
to remember that your negro will bite if he gets the chance, just like a mongrel dog will bite if he gets the
chance and it crosses his mind to do so. You want to know if he did it, your weepy Mr. Coffey with the
scars all over him?"
I nodded.
"Oh, yes," Hammersmith said. "He did it. Don't you doubt it, and don't you turn your back on him. You
might get away with it once or a hundred times ... even a thousand ... but in the end -" He raised a hand
before my eyes and snapped the fingers together rapidly against the thumb, turning the hand into a biting
mouth. "You understand?"
I nodded again.
"He raped them, he killed them, and afterward he was sorry - but those little girls stayed raped, those
little girls stayed dead. But you'll fix him, won't you, Edgecombe? In a few weeks you'll fix him so he
never does anything like that again." He got up, went to the porch rail, and looked vaguely at the
doghouse, standing at the center of its beaten patch, in the middle of those aging turds. "Perhaps you'll
excuse me," he said. "Since I don't have to spend the afternoon in court, I thought I might visit with my
family for a little bit. A man's children are only young once."
"You go ahead," I said. My lips felt numb and distant. "And thank you for your time."
"Don't mention it," he said.
I drove directly from Hammersmith's house to the prison. It was a long drive, and this time I wasn't able
to shorten it by singing songs. It felt like all the songs had gone out of me, at least for awhile. I kept
seeing that poor little boy's disfigured face. And Hammersmith's hand, the fingers going up and down
against the thumb in a biting motion.
5.
Wild Bill Wharton took his first trip down to the restraint room the very next day. He spent the morning
and afternoon being as quiet and good as Mary's little lamb, a state we soon discovered was not natural to
him, and meant trouble. Then, around seven-thirty that evening, Harry felt something warm splash on the
cuffs of uniform pants he had put on clean just that day. It was piss. William Wharton was standing at his
cell, showing his darkening teeth in a wide grin, and pissing all over Harry Terwilliger's pants and shoes.
"The dirty sonofabitch must have been saving it up all day," Harry said later, still disgusted and outraged.
Well, that was it. It was time to show William Wharton who ran the show on E Block. Harry got Brutal
and me, and I alerted Dean and Percy, who were also on. We had three prisoners by then, remember, and
were into what we called full coverage, with my group on from seven in the evening to three in themorning - when trouble was most apt to break out - and two other crews covering the rest of the day.
Those other crews consisted mostly of floaters, with Bill Dodge usually in charge. It wasn't a bad way to
run things, all and all, and I felt that, once I could shift Percy over to days, life would be even better. I
never got around to that, however. I sometimes wonder if it would have changed things, if I had.
Anyway, there was a big watermain in the storage room, on the side away from Old Sparky, and Dean
and Percy hooked up a length of canvas firehose to it. Then they stood by the valve that would open it, if
needed.
Brutal and I hurried down to Wharton's cell, where Wharton still stood, still grinning and still with his
tool hanging out of his pants. I had liberated the straitjacket from the restraint room and tossed it on a
shelf in my office last thing before going home the night before, thinking we might be needing it for our
new problem child. Now I had it in one hand, my index finger hooked under one of the canvas straps.
Harry came behind us, hauling the nozzle of the firehose, which ran back through my office, down the
storage-room steps, and to the drum where Dean and Percy were paying it out as fast as they could.
"Hey, d'jall like that?" Wild Bill asked. He was laughing like a kid at a carnival, laughing so hard he
could barely talk; big tears went rolling down his cheeks. "You come on s'fast I guess you must've. I'm
currently cookin some turds to go with it. Nice soft ones. I'll have them out to y'all tomorrow - "
He saw that I was unlocking his cell door and his eyes narrowed. He saw that Brutal was holding his
revolver in one hand and his nightstick in the other, and they narrowed even more.
"You can come in here on your legs, but you'll go out on your backs, Billy the Kid is goan guarantee you
that," he told us. His eyes shifted back to me. "And if you think you're gonna put that nut-coat on me,
you got another think coming, old hoss."
"You're not the one who says go or jump back around here," I told him. "You should know that, but I
guess you're too dumb to pick it up without a little teaching."
I finished unlocking the door and ran it back on its track. Wharton retreated to the bunk, his cock still
hanging out of his pants, put his hands out to me, palms up, then beckoned with his fingers. "Come on,
you ugly motherfucker," he said. "They be schoolin, all right, but this old boy's well set up to be the
teacher." He shifted his gaze and his darktoothed grin to Brutal. "Come on, big fella, you first. This time
you cain't sneak up behind me. Put down that gun - you ain't gonna shoot it anyway, not you - and we'll
go man-to-man. See who's the better fel-"
Brutal stepped into the cell, but not toward Wharton. He moved to the left once he was through the door,
and Wharton's narrow eyes widened as he saw the firehose pointed at him."No, you don't," he said. "Oh no, you d-"
"Dean!" I yelled. "Turn it on! All the way!"
Wharton jumped forward, and Brutal hit him a good smart lick - the kind of lick I'm sure Percy dreamed
of - across his forehead, laying his baton right over Wharton's eyebrows. Wharton, who seemed to think
we'd never seen trouble until we'd seen him, went to his knees, his eyes open but blind. Then the water
came, Harry staggering back a step under its power and then holding steady, the nozzle firm in his hands,
pointed like a gun. The stream caught Wild Bill Wharton square in the middle of his chest, spun him
halfway around, and drove him back under his bunk. Down the hall, Delacroix was jumping from foot tofoot, cackling shrilly, and cursing at John Coffey, demanding that Coffey tell him what was going on,
who was winning, and how dat gran' fou new boy like dat Chinee water treatment. John said nothing, just
stood there quietly in his too-short pants and his prison slippers. I only had one quick glance at him, but
that was enough to observe his same old expression, both sad and serene. It was as if he'd seen the whole
thing before, not just once or twice but a thousand times.
"Kill the water!" Brutal shouted back over his shoulder, then raced forward into the cell. He sank his
hands into the semi-conscious Wharton's armpits and dragged him out from under his bunk. Wharton was
coughing and making a glub-glub sound. Blood was dribbling into his dazed eyes from above his brows,
where Brutal's stick had popped the skin open in a line.
We had the straitjacket business down to a science, did Brutus Howell and me; we'd practiced it like a
couple of vaudeville hoofers working up a new dance routine. Every now and then, that practice paid off.
Now, for instance. Brutal sat Wharton up and held out his arms toward me the way a kid might hold out
the arms of a Raggedy Andy doll. Awareness was just starting to seep back into Wharton's eyes, the
knowledge that if he didn't start fighting right away, it was going to be too late, but the lines were still
down between his brain and his muscles, and before he could repair them, I had rammed the sleeves of
the coat up his arms and Brutal was doing the buckles up the back. While he took care of that, I grabbed
the cuff-straps, pulled Wharton's arms around his sides, and linked his wrists together with another
canvas strap. He ended up looking like he was hugging himself.
"Goddam you, big dummy, how dey doin widdim?" Delacroix screamed. I heard Mr. Jingles squeaking,
as if he wanted to know, too.
Percy arrived, his shirt wet and sticking to him from his struggles with the watermain, his face glowing
with excitement. Dean came along behind him, wearing a bracelet of purplish bruise around his throat
and looking a lot less thrilled.
"Come on, now, Wild Bill," I said, and yanked Wharton to his feet. "Little walky-walky."
"Don't you call me that!" Wharton screamed shrilly, and I think that for the first time we were seeing real
feelings, and not just a clever animal's camouflage spots. "Wild Bill Hickok wasn't no range-rider! He
never fought him no bear with a Bowie knife, either! He was just another bushwhackin John Law! Dumb
sonofabitch sat with his back to the door and got kilt by a drunk!"
"Oh my suds and body, a history lesson!" Brutal exclaimed, and shoved Wharton out of his cell. "A feller
just never knows what he's going to get when he clocks in here, only that it's apt to be nice. But with so
many nice people like you around, I guess that kind of stands to reason, don't it? And you know what?
Pretty soon you'll be history yourself, Wild Bill. Meantime, you get on down the hall. We got a room for
you. Kind of a cooling-off room."
Wharton gave a furious, inarticulate scream and threw himself at Brutal, even though he was snugly
buckled into the coat now, and his arms were wrapped around behind him. Percy made to draw his baton
- the Wetmore Solution for all of life's problems - and Dean put a hand on his wrist. Percy gave him a
puzzled, half-indignant look, as if to say that after what Wharton had done to Dean, Dean should be the
last person in the world to want to hold him back.
Brutal pushed Wharton backward. I caught him and pushed him to Harry. And Harry propelled him on
down the Green Mile, past the gleeful Delacroix and the impassive Coffey. Wharton ran to keep fromfalling on his face, spitting curses the whole way. Spitting them the way a welder's torch spits sparks. We
banged him into the last cell on the right while Dean, Harry, and Percy (who for once wasn't complaining
about being unfairly overworked) yanked all of the crap out of the restraint room. While they did that, I
had a brief conversation with Wharton.
"You think you're tough," I said, "and maybe you are, sonny, but in here tough don't matter. Your
stampeding days are over. If you take it easy on us, we'll take it easy on you. If you make it hard, you'll
die in the end just the same, only we'll sharpen you like a pencil before you go."
"You're gonna be so happy to see the end of me," Wharton said in a hoarse voice. He was struggling
against the straitjacket even though he must have known it would do no good, and his face was as red as
a tomato. "And until I'm gone, I'll make your lives miserable." He bared his teeth at me like an angry
baboon.
"If that's all you want, to make our lives miserable, you can quit now, because you've already
succeeded," Brutal said. "But as far as your time on the Mile goes, Wharton, we don't care if you spend
all of it in the room with the soft walls. And you can wear that damned nut-coat until your arms gangrene
from lack of circulation and fall right off." He paused. "No one much comes down here, you know. And
if you think anyone gives much of a shit what happens to you, one way or another, you best reconsider.
To the world in general, you're already one dead outlaw."
Wharton was studying Brutal carefully, and the color was fading out of his face. "Lemme out of it", he
said in a placatory voice - a voice too sane and too reasonable to trust. "I'll be good. Honest Injun."
Harry appeared in the cell doorway. The end of the corridor looked like a rummage sale, but we'd set
things to rights with good speed once we got started. We had before; we knew the drill. "All ready,"
Harry said.
Brutal grabbed the bulge in the canvas where Wharton's right elbow was and yanked him to his feet.
"Come on, Wild Billy. And look on the good side. You're gonna have at least twenty-four hours to
remind yourself never to sit with your back to the door, and to never hold onto no aces and eights."
"Lemme out of it," Wharton said. He looked from Brutal to Harry to me, the red creeping back into his
face. "I'll be good - I tell you I've learned my lesson. I ... I ... ummmmmahhhhhhh-!"
He suddenly collapsed, half of him in the cell, half of him on the played-out lino of the Green Mile,
kicking his feet and bucking his body.
"Holy Christ, he's pitchin a fit," Percy whispered.
"Sure, and my sister's the Whore of Babylon," Brutal said. "She dances the hootchie-kootchie for Moses
on Saturday nights in a long white veil." He bent down and hooked a hand into one of Wharton's armpits.
I got the other one. Wharton threshed between us like a hooked fish. Carrying his jerking body, listening
to him grunt from one end and fart from the other was one of my life's less pleasant experiences.
I looked up and met John Coffey's eyes for a second. They were bloodshot, and his dark cheeks were
wet. He had been crying again. I thought of Hammersmith making that biting gesture with his hand and
shivered a little. Then I turned my attention back to Wharton.
We threw him into the restraint room like he was cargo, and watched him lie on the floor, bucking hardin the straitjacket next to the drain we had once checked for the mouse which had started its E Block life
as Steamboat Willy.
"I don't much care if he swallows his tongue or something and dies," Dean said in his hoarse and raspy
voice, "but think of the paperwork, boys! It'd never end."
"Never mind the paperwork, think of the hearing," Harry said gloomily. "We'd lose our damned jobs.
End up picking peas down Mississippi. You know what Mississippi is, don't you? It's the Indian word for
asshole."
"He ain't gonna die, and he ain't gonna swallow his tongue, either," Brutal said. "When we open this door
tomorrow, he's gonna be just fine. Take my word for it."
That's the way it was, too. The man we took back to his cell the next night at nine was quiet, pallid, and
seemingly chastened. He walked with his head down, made no effort to attack anyone when the
straitjacket came off, and only stared listlessly at me when I told him it would go just the same the next
time, and he just had to ask himself how much time he wanted to spend pissing in his pants and eating
baby-food a spoonful at a time.
"I'll be good, boss, I learnt my lesson," he whispered in a humble little voice as we put him back in his
cell. Brutal looked at me and winked.
Late the next day, William Wharton, who was Billy the Kid to himself and never that bushwhacking
John Law Wild Bill Hickok, bought a moon-pie from Old Toot-Toot. Wharton had been expressly
forbidden any such commerce, but the afternoon crew was composed of floaters, as I think I have said,
and the deal went down. Toot himself undoubtedly knew better, but to him the snack-wagon was always
a case of a nickel is a nickel, a dime is a dime, I'd sing another chorus but I don't have the time.
That night, when Brutal ran his check-round, Wharton was standing at the door of his cell. He waited
until Brutal looked up at him, then slammed the heels of his hands into his bulging cheeks and shot a
thick and amazingly long stream of chocolate sludge into Brutal's face. He had crammed the entire
moon-pie into his trap, held it there until it liquefied, and then used it like chewing tobacco.
Wharton fell back on his bunk wearing a chocolate goatee, kicking his legs and screaming with laughter
and pointing to Brutal, who was wearing a lot more than a goatee. "Li'l Black Sambo, yassuh, boss,
yassuh, howdoo you do?" Wharton held his belly and howled. "Gosh, if it had only been ka-ka! I wish it
had been! If I'd had me some of that---"
"You are ka-ka," Brutal growled, "and I hope you got your bags packed, because you're going back down
to your favorite toilet."
Once again Wharton was bundled into the strait jacket, and once again we stowed him in the room with
the soft walls. Two days, this time. Sometimes we could hear him raving in there, sometimes we could
hear him promising that he'd be good, that he'd come to his senses and be good, and sometimes we could
hear him screaming that he needed a doctor, that he was dying. Mostly, though, he was silent. And he
was silent when we took him out again, too, walking, back to his cell with his head down and his eyes
dull, not responding when Harry said, "Remember, it's up to you." He would be all right for a while, and
then he'd try something else. There was nothing he did that hadn't been tried before (well, except for the
thing with the moon-pie, maybe; even Brutal admitted that was pretty original), but his sheer persistencewas scary. I was afraid that sooner or later someone's attention might lapse and there would be hell to
pay. And the situation might continue for quite awhile, because somewhere he had a lawyer who was
beating the bushes, telling folks how wrong it would be to kill this fellow upon whose brow the dew of
youth had not yet dried - and who was, incidentally, as white as old Jeff Davis. There was no sense
complaining about it, because keeping Wharton out of the chair was his lawyer's job. Keeping him safely
jugged was ours. And in the end, Old Sparky would almost certainly have him, lawyer or no lawyer.
6.
That was the week Melinda Moores, the warden's wife, came home from Indianola. The doctors were
done with her; they had their interesting, newfangled X-ray photographs of the tumor in her head; they
had documented the weakness in her hand and the paralyzing pains that racked her almost constantly by
then, and were done with her. They gave her husband a bunch of pills with morphine in them and sent
Melinda home to die. Hal Moores had some sick-leave piled up - not a lot, they didn't give you a lot in
those days, but he took what he had so he could help her do what she had to do.
My wife and I went to see her three days or so after she came home. I called ahead and Hal said yes, that
would be fine, Melinda was having a pretty good day and would enjoy seeing us.
"I hate calls like this," I said to Janice as we drove to the little house where the Mooreses had spent most
of their marriage.
"So does everyone, honey," she said, and patted my hand. "We'll bear up under it, and so will she."
"I hope so."
We found Melinda in the sitting room, planted in a bright slant of unseasonably warm October sun, and
my first shocked thought was that she had lost ninety pounds. She hadn't, of course - if she'd lost that
much weight, she hardly would have been there at all - but that was my brain's initial reaction to what my
eyes were reporting. Her face had fallen away to show the shape of the underlying skull, and her skin
was as white as parchment. There were dark circles under her eyes. And it was the first time I ever saw
her in her rocker when she didn't have a lapful of sewing or afghan squares or rags for braiding into a
rug. She was just sitting there. Like a person in a train-station.
"Melinda," my wife said warmly. I think she was as shocked as I was - more, perhaps - but she hid it
splendidly, as some women seem able to do. She went to Melinda, dropped on one knee beside the
rocking chair in which the warden's wife sat, and took one of her hands. As she did, my eye happened on
the blue hearthrug by the fireplace. It occurred to me that it should have been the shade of tired old limes,
because now this room was just another version of the Green Mile.
"I brought you some tea," Jan said, "the kind I put up myself. It's a nice sleepy tea. I've left it in the
kitchen."
"Thank you so much, darlin," Melinda said. Her voice sounded old and rusty
"How you feeling, dear?" my wife asked.
"Better," Melinda said in her rusty, grating voice. "Not so's I want to go out to a barn dance, but at least
there's no pain today. They give me some pills for the headaches. Sometimes they even work.""That's good, isn't it?"
"But I can't grip so well. Something's happened ... to my hand." She raised it, looked at it as if she had
never seen it before, then lowered it back into her lap. "Something's happened ... all over me." She began
to cry in a soundless way that made me think of John Coffey. It started to chime in my head again, that
thing he'd said: I helped it, didn't I? I helped it, didn't I? Like a rhyme you can't get rid of.
Hal came in then. He collared me, and you can believe me when I say I was glad to be collared. We went
into the kitchen, and he poured me half a shot of white whiskey, hot stuff fresh out of some countryman's
still. We clinked our glasses together and drank. The shine went down like coal-oil, but the bloom in the
belly was heaven. Still, when Moores tipped the mason jar at me, wordlessly asking if I wanted the other
half, I shook my head and waved it off. Wild Bill Wharton was out of restraints - for the time being,
anyway - and it wouldn't be safe to go near where he was with a booze-clouded head. Not even with bars
between us.
"I don't know how long I can take this, Paul," he said in a low voice. "There's a girl who comes in
mornings to help me with her, but the doctors I say she may lose control of her bowels, and ... and ..."
He stopped, his throat working, trying hard not to cry in front of me again.
"Go with it as best you can," I said. I reached out across the table and briefly squeezed his palsied,
liverspotted hand. "Do that day by day and give the rest over to God. There's nothing else you can do, is
there?"
"I guess not. But it's hard, Paul. I pray you never have to find out how hard."
He made an effort to collect himself.
"Now tell me the news. How are you doing with William Wharton? And how are you making out with
Percy Wetmore?"
We talked shop for a while, and got through the visit. After, all the way home, with my wife sitting
silent, for the most part - wet-eyed and thoughtful - in the passenger seat beside me, Coffey's words ran
around in my head like Mr. Jingles running around in Delacroix's cell: I helped it, didn't I?
"It's terrible," my wife said dully at one point. "And there's nothing anyone can do to help her."
I nodded agreement and thought, I helped it, didn't I? But that was crazy, and I tried as best I could to put
it out of my mind.
As we turned into our dooryard, she finally spoke a second time - not about her old friend Melinda, but
about my urinary infection. She wanted to know if it was really gone. Really gone, I told her.
"That's fine, then," she said, and kissed me over the eyebrow, in that shivery place of mine. "Maybe we
ought to, you know, get up to a little something. If you have the time and the inclination, that is."
Having plenty of the latter and just enough of the former, I took her by the hand and led her into the back
bedroom and took her clothes off as she stroked the part of me that swelled and throbbed but didn't hurt
anymore. And as I moved in her sweetness, slipping through it in that slow way she liked - that we both
liked - I thought of John Coffey, saying he'd helped it, he'd helped it, hadn't he? Like a snatch of song
that won't leave your mind until it's damned good and ready.Later, as I drove to the prison, I got to thinking that very soon we would have to start rehearsing for
Delacroix's execution. That thought led to how Percy was going to be out front this time, and I felt a
shiver of dread. I told myself to just go with it, one execution and we'd very likely be shut of Percy
Wetmore for good ... but still I felt that shiver, as if the infection I'd been suffering with wasn't gone at
all, but had only switched locations, from boiling my groin to freezing my backbone.
7.
"Come on," Brutal told Delacroix the following evening. "We're going for a little walk. You and me and
Mr. Jingles."
Delacroix looked at him distrustfully, then reached down into the cigar box for the mouse. He cupped it
m the palm of one hand and looked at Brutal with narrowed eyes.
"Whatchoo talking about?" he asked.
"It's a big night for you and Mr. Jingles," Dean said, as he and Harry joined Brutal. The chain of bruises
around Dean's neck had gone an unpleasant yellow color, but at least he could talk again without
sounding like a dog barking at a cat. He looked at Brutal. "Think we ought to put the shackles on him,
Brute?"
Brutal appeared to consider. "Naw," he said at last. "He's gonna be good, ain't you, Del? You and the
mouse, both. After all, you're gonna be showin off for some high muck-a-mucks tonight."
Percy and I were standing up by the duty desk, watching this, Percy with his arms folded and a small,
contemptuous smile on his lips. After a bit, he took out his horn comb and went to work on his hair with
it. John Coffey was watching, too, standing silently at the bars of his cell. Wharton was lying on his
bunk, staring up at the ceiling and ignoring the whole show. He was still "being good," although what he
called good was what the docs at Briar Ridge called catatonic. And there was one other person there, as
well. He was tucked out of sight in my office, but his skinny shadow fell out the door and onto the Green
Mile.
"What dis about, you gran' 'fou?" Del asked querulously, drawing his feet up on the bunk as Brutal undid
the double locks on his cell door and ran it open. His eyes flicked back and forth among the three of
them.
"Well, I tell you," Brutal said. "Mr. Moores is gone for awhile - his wife is under the weather, as you may
have heard. So Mr. Anderson is in charge, Mr. Curtis Anderson."
"Yeah? What that. got to do with me?"
"Well," Harry said, "Boss Anderson's heard about your mouse, Del, and wants to see him perform. He
and about six other fellows are over in Admin, just waiting for you to show up. Not just plain old bluesuit
guards, either. These are pretty big bugs, just like Brute said. One of them, I believe, is a politician all the
way from the state capital."
Delacroix swelled visibly at this, and I saw not so much as a single shred of doubt on his face. Of course
they wanted to see Mr. Jingles; who would not?
He scrummed around, first under his bunk and then under his pillow. He eventually found one of thosebig pink peppermints and the wildly colored spool. He looked at Brutal questioningly, and Brutal
nodded.
"Yep. It's the spool trick they're really wild to see, I guess, but the way he eats those mints is pretty
damned cute, too. And don't forget the cigar box. You'll want it to carry him in, right?"
Delacroix got the box and put Mr. Jingles's props in it, but mouse he settled on the shoulder of his shirt.
Then he stepped out of his cell, his puffed-out chest leading the way, and regarded Dean and Harry. "You
boys coming?"
"Naw," Dean said. "Got other fish to fry. But you knock em for a loop, Del - show em what happens
when a Louisiana boy puts the hammer down and really goes to work."
"You bet." A smile shone out of his face, so sudden and so simple in its happiness that I felt my heart
break for him a little, in spite of the terrible thing he had done. What a world we live in - what a world!
Delacroix turned to John Coffey, with whom he had struck up a diffident friendship not much different
from a hundred other deathhouse acquaintances I'd seen.
"You knock em for a loop, Del," Coffey said in a serious voice. "You show em all his tricks."
Delacroix nodded and held his hand up by his shoulder. Mr. Jingles stepped onto it like it was a platform,
and Delacroix held the hand out toward Coffey's cell. John Coffey stuck out a huge finger, and I'll be
damned if that mouse didn't stretch out his neck and lick the end of it, just like a dog.
"Come on, Del, quit lingerin," Brutal said. "These folks're settin back a hot dinner at home to watch your
mouse cut his capers." Not true, of course Anderson would have been there until eight o'clock on any
night, and the guards he'd dragged in to watch Delacroix's "show" would be there until eleven or twelve,
depending on when their shifts were scheduled to end. The politician from the state capital would most
likely turn out to be an office janitor in a borrowed tie. But Delacroix had no way of knowing any of that.
"I'm ready," Delacroix said, speaking with the simplicity of a great star who has somehow managed to
retain the common touch. "Let's go." And as Brutal led him up the Green Mile with Mr. Jingles perched
there on the little man's shoulder, Delacroix once more began to bugle, "Messieurs et mesdames!
Bienvenue au cirque de mousie!" Yet, even lost as deeply in his own fantasy world as he was, he gave
Percy a wide berth and a mistrustful glance.
Harry and Dean stopped in front of the empty cell across from Wharton's (that worthy had still not so
much as stirred). They watched as Brutal unlocked the door to the exercise yard, where another two
guards were waiting to join him, and led Delacroix out, bound for his command performance before the
grand high poohbahs of Cold Mountain Penitentiary. We waited until the door was locked again, and
then I looked toward my office. That shadow was still lying on the floor, thin as famine, and I was glad
Delacroix had been too excited to see it.
"Come on out," I said. "And let's move along brisk, folks. I want to get two run-throughs in, and we don't
have much time."
Old Toot-Toot, looking as bright-eyed and bushytailed as ever, came out, walked to Delacroix's cell, and
strolled in through the open door. "Sittin down," he said. "I'm sittin down, I'm sittin down, I'm sittin
down."This is the real circus, I thought, closing my eyes for a second. This is the real circus right here, and we're
all just a bunch of trained mice. Then I put the thought out of my mind, and we started to rehearse.
8.
The first rehearsal went well, and so did the second. Percy performed better than I could have hoped for
in my wildest dreams. That didn't mean things would go right when the time really came for the Cajun to
walk the Mile, but it was a big step in the right direction. It occurred to me that it had gone well because
Percy was at long last doing something he cared about. I felt a surge of contempt at that, and pushed it
away. What did it matter? He would cap Delacroix and roll him, and then both of them would be gone. If
that wasn't a happy ending, what was? And, as Moores had pointed out, Delacroix's nuts were going to
fry no matter who was out front.
Still, Percy had shown to good advantage in his new role and he knew it. We all did. As for me, I was too
relieved to dislike him much, at east or the time being. It looked as if things were going to go all right. I
was further relieved to find that Percy actually listened when we suggested some things he could do that
might improve his performance even more, or at least cut down the possibility of something going
wrong. If you want to know the truth, we got pretty enthusiastic about it - even Dean, who ordinarily
stood well back from Percy - physically as well as mentally, if he could. None of it that surprising, either,
I suppose - for most men, nothing is more flattering than having a young person actually pay attention to
his advice, and we were no different in that regard. As a result, not a one of us noticed that Wild Bill
Wharton was no longer looking up at the ceiling. That includes me, but I know he wasn't. He was looking
at us as we stood there by the duty desk, gassing and giving Percy advice. Giving him advice! And him
pretending to listen! Quite a laugh, considering how things turned out!The sound of a key rattling into the lock of the door to the exercise yard put an end to our little
postrehearsal critique. Dean gave Percy a warning glance. "Not a word or a wrong look," he said. "We
don't want him to know what we've been doing. It's not good for them. Upsets them."
Percy nodded and ran a finger across his lips in a mum's-the-word gesture that was supposed to be funny
and wasn't. The exercise-yard door opened and Delacroix came in, escorted by Brutal, who was carrying
the cigar box with the colored spool in it, the way the magician's assistant in a vaudeville show might
carry the boss's props offstage at the end of the act. Mr. Jingles was perched on Delacroix's shoulder.
And Delacroix himself? I -tell you what - Lillie Langtry couldn't have looked any glowier after
performing at the White House. "They love Mr. Jingles!"
Delacroix proclaimed. "They laugh and cheer and clap they hands!"
"Well, that's aces," Percy said. He spoke in an indulgent, proprietary way that didn't sound like the old
Percy at all. "Pop on back in your cell, old-timer."
Delacroix gave him a comical look of distrust, and the old Percy came busting out. He bared his teeth in
a mock snarl and made as if to grab Delacroix. It was a joke, of course, Percy was happy, not in a serious
grabbing mood at all, but Delacroix didn't know that. He jerked away with an expression of fear and
dismay, and tripped over one of Brutal's big feet. He went down hard, hitting the linoleum with the back
of his head. Mr. Jingles leaped away in time to avoid being crushed, and went squeaking off down the
Green Mile to Delacroix's cell.
Delacroix got to his feet, gave the chuckling Percy a single hate-filled glance, then scurried off after hispet, calling for him and rubbing the back of his head. Brutal (who didn't know that Percy had shown
exciting signs of competency for a change) gave Percy a wordless look of contempt and went after Del,
shaking his keys out.
I think what happened next happened because Percy was actually moved to apologize - I know it's hard
to believe, but he was in an extraordinary humor that day. If true, it only proves a cynical old adage I
heard once, something about how no good deed goes unpunished. Remember me telling you about how,
after he'd chased the mouse down to the restraint room on one of those two occasions before Delacroix
joined us, Perry got a little too close to The Pres's cell? Doing that was dangerous, which was why the
Green Mile was so wide - when you walked straight down the middle of it, you couldn't be reached from
the cells. The Pres hadn't done anything to Percy, but I remember thinking that Arlen Bitterbuck might
have, had it been him Percy had gotten too close to. just to teach him a lesson.
Well, The Pres and The Chief had both moved on, but Wild Bill Wharton had taken their place. He was
worse-mannered than The Pres or The Chief had ever dreamed of being, and he'd been watching the
whole little play, hoping for a chance to get on stage himself. That chance now fell into his lap, courtesy
of Percy Wetmore.
"Hey, Del!" Percy called, half-laughing, starting after Brutal and Delacroix and drifting much too close
to Wharton's side of the Green Mile without realizing it. "Hey, you numb shit, I didn't mean nothin by it!
Are you all ri-"
Wharton was up off his bunk and over to the bars of his cell in a flash - never in my time as a guard did I
see anyone move so fast, and that includes some of the athletic young men Brutal and I worked with later
at Boys' Correctional. He shot his arms out through the bars and grabbed Percy, first by the shoulders of
his uniform blouse and then by the throat. Wharton dragged him back against his cell door. Percy
squealed like a pig in a slaughter-chute, and I saw from his eyes that he thought he was going to die.
"Ain't you sweet," Wharton whispered. One hand left Percy's throat and ruffled through his hair. "Soft!"
he said, half-laughing. "Like a girl's. I druther fuck your asshole than your sister's pussy, I think." And he
actually kissed Percy's ear.
I think Percy - who had beat Delacroix onto the block for accidentally brushing his crotch, remember -
knew exactly what was happening. I doubt that he wanted to, but I think he did. All the color had drained
from his face, and the blemishes on his cheeks stood out like birthmarks. His eyes were huge and wet. A
line of spittle leaked from one comer of his twitching mouth. All this happened quick - it was begun and
done in less than ten seconds, I'd say.
Harry and I stepped forward, our billies raised. Dean drew his gun. But before things could go so much
as an inch further, Wharton let go of Perry and stepped back, raising his hands to his shoulders and
grinning his dank grin. "I let im go, I 'us just playin and I let im go," he said. "Never hurt airy single hair
on that boy's purty head, so don't you go stickin me down in that goddam soft room again."
Percy Wetmore darted across the Green Mile and cringed against the barred door of the empty cell on the
other side, breathing so fast and so loud that it sounded almost like sobbing. He had finally gotten his
lesson in keeping to the center of the Green Mile and away from the frumious bandersnatch, the teeth
that bite and the claws that catch. I had an idea it was a lesson that would stick with him longer than all
the advice we'd given him after our rehearsals.There was an expression of utter terror on his face, and his precious hair was seriously mussed up for the
first time since I'd met him, all in spikes and tangles. He looked like someone who has just escaped being
raped.
There was a moment of utter stop then, a quiet so thick that the only sound was the sobbing whistle of
Percy's breathing. What broke it was cackling laughter, so sudden and so completely its own mad thing
that it was shocking. Wharton, was my first thought, but it wasn't him. It was Delacroix, standing in the
open door of his cell and pointing at Percy. The mouse was back on his shoulder, and Delacroix looked
like a small but malevolent male witch, complete with imp.
"Lookit him, he done piss his pants!" Delacroix howled. "Lookit what the big man done! Bus' other
people wid 'is stick, mais oui some mauvais homme, but when someone touch him, he make water in 'is
pants jus' like a baby!"
He laughed and pointed, all his fear and hatred of Percy coming out in that derisive laughter. Percy stared
at him, seemingly incapable of moving or speaking. Wharton stepped back to the bars of his cell, looked
down at the dark splotch on the front of Percy's trousers - it was small but it was there, and no question
about what it was - and grinned. "Somebody ought to buy the tough boy a didy," he said, and went back
to his bunk, chuffing laughter.
Brutal went down to Delacroix's cell, but the Cajun had ducked inside and thrown himself on his bunk
before Brutal could get there.
I reached out and grasped Percy's shoulder. "Percy-" I began, but that was as far as I got. He came to life,
shaking my hand off. He looked down at the front of his pants, saw the spot spreading there, and blushed
a dark, fiery red. He looked up at me again, then at Harry and Dean. I remember being glad that Old
Toot-Toot was gone. If he'd been around, the story would have been all over the prison in a single day.
And, given Percy's last name-an unfortunate one, in this context - it was a story that would have been
told with the relish of high glee for years to come.
"You talk about this to anyone, and you'll all be on the breadlines in a week," he whispered fiercely. It
was the sort of crack that would have made me want to swat him under other circumstances, but under
these, I only pitied him. I think he saw that pity, and it made it worse with him - like having an open
wound scoured with nettles.
'"What goes on here stays here," Dean said quietly. "You don't have to worry about that."
Percy looked back over his shoulder, toward Delacroix's cell. Brutal was just locking the door, and from
inside, deadly clear, we could still hear Delacroix giggling. Percy's look was as black as thunder. I
thought of telling him that you reaped what you sowed in this life, and then decided this might not be the
right time for a scripture lesson.
"As for him - " he began, but never finished. He left, instead, head down, to go into the storage room and
look for a dry pair of pants.
"He's so purty," Wharton said in a dreamy voice. Harry told him to shut the fuck up before he went down
to the restraint room just on general damned principles. Wharton folded his arms on his chest, closed his
eyes, and appeared to go to sleep.
9.The night before Delacroix's execution came down hotter and muggier than ever - eighty-one degrees by
the thermometer outside the Admin readyroom window when I clocked in at six. Eighty-one degrees at
the end of October, think of that, and thunder rumbling in the west like it does in July. I'd met a member
of my congregation in town that afternoon, and he had asked me, with apparent seriousness, if I thought
such unseasonable weather could be a sign of the Last Times. I said that I was sure not, but it crossed my
mind that it was Last Times for Eduard Delacroix, all right. Yes indeed it was.
Bill Dodge was standing in the door to the exercise yard, drinking coffee and smoking him a little smoke.
He looked around at me and said, "Well, lookit here. Paul Edgecombe, big as life and twice as ugly."
"How'd the day go, Billy?"
"All right."
"Delacroix?"
"Fine. He seems to understand it's tomorrow, and yet it's like he don't understand. You know how most
of em are when the end finally comes for them."
I nodded. "Wharton?'
Bill laughed. "What a comedian. Makes Jack Benny sound like a Quaker. He told Rolfe Wettermark that
he ate strawberry jam out of his wife's pussy."
"What did Rolfe say?"
"That he wasn't married. Said it must have been his mother Wharton was thinking of."
I laughed, and hard. That really was funny, in a low sort of way. And it was good just to be able to laugh
without feeling like someone was lighting matches way down low in my gut. Bill laughed with me, then
turned the rest of his coffee out in the yard, which was empty except for a few shuffling trusties, most of
whom had been there for a thousand years or so.
Thunder rumbled somewhere far off, and unfocused heat lightning flashed in the darkening sky
overhead. Bill looked up uneasily, his laughter dying.
"I tell you what, though," he said, "I don't like this weather much. Feels like something's gonna happen.
Something bad."
About that he was right. The bad thing happened right around quarter of ten that night. That was when
Percy killed Mr. Jingles.
10.
At first it seemed like it was going to be a pretty good night in spite of the heat - John Coffey was being
his usual quiet self, Wild Bill was making out to be Mild Bill, and Delacroix was in good spirits for a
man who had a date with Old Sparky in a little more than twenty-four hours.
He did understand what was going to happen to him, at least on the most basic level; he had ordered chili
for his last meal and gave me special instructions for the kitchen. "Tell em to lay on dat hotsauce," he
said. "Tell em the kind dat really jump up your t'roat an' say howdy - the green stuff, none of dat mild.
Dat stuff gripe me like a motherfucker, I can't get off the toilet the nex' day, but I don't think I gonnahave a problem this time, n'est-ce pas?"
Most of them worry about their immortal souls with a kind of moronic ferocity, but Delacroix pretty
much dismissed my questions about what he wanted for spiritual comfort in his last hours. If "dat fella"
Schuster had been good enough for Big Chief Bitterbuck, Del reckoned, Schuster would be good enough
for him. No, what he cared about - you've guessed already, I'm sure - was what was going to happen to
Mr. Jingles after he, Delacroix, passed on. I was used to spending long hours with the condemned on the
night before their last march, but this was the first time I'd spent those long hours pondering the fate of a
mouse.
Del considered scenario after scenario, patiently working the possibilities through his dim mind. And
while he thought aloud, wanting to provide for his pet mouse's future as if it were a child that had to be
put through college, he threw that colored spool against the wall. Each time he did it, Mr. Jingles would
spring after it, track it down, and then roll it back to Del's foot. It started to get on my nerves after awhile
-first the clack of the spool against the stone wall, then the minute clitter of Mr. Jingles's paws. Although
it was a cute trick, it palled after ninety minutes or so. And Mr. Jingles never seemed to get tired. He
paused every now and then to refresh himself with a drink of water out of a coffee saucer Delacroix kept
for just that purpose, or to munch a pink crumb of peppermint candy, and then back to it he went. Several
times it was on the tip of my tongue to tell Delacroix to give it a rest, and each time I reminded myself
that he had this night and tomorrow to play the spool-game with Mr. Jingles, and that was all. Near the
end, though, it began to be really difficult to hold onto that thought - you know how it is, with a noise
that's repeated over and over. After a while it shoots your nerve. I started to speak after all, then
something made me look over my shoulder and out the cell door. John Coffey was standing at his cell
door across the way, and he shook his head at me: right, left, back to center. As if he had read my mind
and was telling me to think again.
I would see that Mr. Jingles got to Delacroix's maiden aunt, I said, the one who had sent him the big bag
of candy. His colored spool could go as well, even his "house" - we'd take up a collection and see that
Toot gave up his claim on the Corona box. No, said Delacroix after some consideration (he had time to
throw the spool against the wall at least five times, with Mr. Jingles either nosing it back or pushing it
with his paws), that wouldn't do. Aunt Hermione was too old, she wouldn't understand Mr. Jingles's
frisky ways, and suppose Mr. Jingles outlived her? What would happen to him then? No, no, Aunt
Hermione just wouldn't do.
Well, then, I asked, suppose one of us took it? One of us guards? We could keep him right here on E
Block. No, Delacroix said, he thanked me kindly for the thought, certainement, but Mr. Jingles was a
mouse that yearned to be free. He, Eduard Delacroix, knew this, because Mr. Jingles had - you guessed it
- whispered the information in his ear.
"All right," I said, "one of us will take him home, Del. Dean, maybe. He's got a little boy that would just
love a pet mouse, I bet."
Delacroix actually turned pale with horror at the thought. A little kid in charge of a rodent genius like
Mr. Jingles? How in the name of le bon Dieu could a little kid be expected to keep up with his training,
let alone teach him new tricks? And suppose the kid lost interest and forgot to feed him for two or three
days at a stretch? Delacroix, who had roasted six human beings alive in an effort to cover up his original
crime, shuddered with the delicate revulsion of an ardent anti-vivisectionist.All right, I said, I'd take him myself (promise them anything, remember; in their last forty-eight hours,
promise them anything). How would that be?
"No, sir, Boss Edgecombe," Del said apologetically. He threw the spool again. It hit the wall, bounced,
spun; then Mr. Jingles was on it like white on rice and nosing it back to Delacroix. "Thank you kindly -
merci beaucoup - but you live out in the woods, and Mr. Jingles, he be scared to live out dans la foret. I
know, because-"
"I think I can guess how you know, Del," I said.
Delacroix nodded, smiling. "But we gonna figure this out. You bet!" He threw the spool. Mr. Jingles
clittered after it. I tried not to wince.
In the end it was Brutal who saved the day. He had been up by the duty desk, watching Dean and Harry
play cribbage. Percy was there, too, and Brutal finally tired of trying to start a conversation with him and
getting nothing but sullen grunts in response. He strolled down to where I sat on a stool outside of
Delacroix's cell and stood there listening to us with his arms folded."How about Mouseville?" Brutal asked into the considering silence which followed Del's rejection of my
spooky old house out in the woods. He threw the comment out in a casual just-an-idea tone of voice.
"Mouseville?" Delacroix asked, giving Brutal a look both startled and interested. "What Mouseville?"
"It's this tourist attraction down in Florida," he said. "Tallahassee, I think. Is that right, Paul?
Tallahassee?"
"Yep," I said, speaking without a moment's hesitation, thinking God bless Brutus Howell. "Tallahassee.
Right down the road apiece from the dog university." Brutal's mouth twitched at that, and I thought he
was going to queer the pitch by laughing, but he got it under control and nodded. I'd hear about the dog
university later, though, I imagined.
This time Del didn't throw the spool, although Mr. Jingles stood on Del's slipper with his front paws
raised, clearly lusting for another chance to chase. The Cajun looked from Brutal to me and back to
Brutal again. "What dey do in Mouseville?" he asked.
"You think they'd take Mr. Jingles?" Brutal asked me, simultaneously ignoring Del and drawing him on.
"Think he's got the stuff, Paul?"
I tried to appear considering. "You know," I said, "the more I think of it, the more it seems like a brilliant
idea." From the comer of my eye I saw Percy come partway down the Green Mile (giving Wharton's cell
a very wide berth). He stood with one shoulder leaning against an empty cell, listening with a small,
contemptuous smile on his lips.
"What dis Mouseville?" Del asked, now frantic to know.
"A tourist attraction, like I told you," Brutal said. "There's, oh I dunno, a hundred or so mice there.
Wouldn't you say, Paul?"
"More like a hundred and fifty these days," I said. "It's a big success. I understand they're thinking of
opening one out in California and calling it Mouseville West, that's how much business is booming.
Trained mice are the coming thing with the smart set, I guess - I don't understand it, myself."Del sat with the colored spool in his hand, looking at us, his own situation forgotten for the time being.
"They only take the smartest mice," Brutal cautioned, "the ones that can do tricks. And they can't be
white mice, because those are pet-shop mice."
"Pet-shop mice, yeah, you bet!" Delacroix said fiercely. "I hate dem pet-shop mice!"
"And what they got," Brutal said, his eyes distant now as he imagined it, "is this tent you go into-"
"Yeah, yeah, like inna cirque! Do you gotta pay to get in?"
"You shittin me? Course you gotta pay to get in. A dime apiece, two cents for the kiddies. And there's,
like, this whole city made out of Bakelite boxes and toilet-paper rolls, with windows made out of
isinglass so you can see what they're up to in there-"
"Yeah! Yeah!" Delacroix was in ecstasy now. Then he turned to me. "What ivy-glass?"
"Like on the front of a stove, where you can see in," I. said.
"Oh sure! Dat shit!" He cranked his hand at Brutal, wanting him to go on, and Mr. Jingles's little oildrop
eyes practically spun in their sockets, trying to keep that spool in view. It was pretty funny. Percy came a
little closer, as if wanting to get a better look, and I saw John Coffey frowning at him, but I was too
wrapped up in Brutal's fantasy to pay much attention. This took telling the condemned man what he
wanted to hear to new heights, and I was all admiration, believe me.
'"Well," Brutal said, "there's the mouse city, but what the kids really like is the Mouseville All-Star
Circus, where there's mice that swing on trapezes, and mice that roll these little barrels, and mice that
stack coins-"
"Yeah, dat's it! Dat's the place for Mr. Jingles!" Delacroix said. His eyes sparkled and his cheeks were
high with color. It occurred to me that Brutus Howell was a kind of saint. "You gonna be a circus mouse
after all, Mr. Jingles! Gonna live in a mouse city down Florida! All ivy-glass windows! Hurrah!"
He threw the spool extra-hard. It hit low on the wall, took a crazy bounce, and squirted out between the
bars of his cell door and onto the Mile. Mr. Jingles raced out after it, and Percy saw his chance.
"No, you fool!" Brutal yelled, but Percy paid no attention. Just as Mr. Jingles reached the spool - too
intent on it to realize his old enemy was at hand - Percy brought the sole of one hard black workshoe
down on it. There was an audible snap as Mr. Jingles's back broke, and blood gushed from his mouth.
His tiny dark eyes bulged in their sockets, and in them I read an expression of surprised agony that was
all too human.
Delacroix screamed with horror and grief. He threw himself at the door of his cell and thrust his arms out
between the bars, reaching as far as he could, crying the mouse's name over and over.
Percy turned toward him, smiling. Toward the three of us. "There," he said. "I knew I'd get him, sooner
or later. Just a matter of time, really." He turned and walked back up the Green Mile, not hurrying,
leaving Mr. Jingles lying on the linoleum in a spreading pool of his own blood.The Green Mile
Part Four:
The Bad Death of Eduard Delacroix
1.
All this other writing aside, I've kept a little diary since I took up residence at Georgia Pines - no big
deal, just a couple of paragraphs a day, mostly about the weather - and I looked back through it last
evening. I wanted to see just how long it has been since my grandchildren, Christopher and Danielle,
more or less forced me into Georgia Pines. "For your own good, Gramps," they said. Of course they did.
Isn't that what people mostly say when they have finally figured out how to get rid of a problem that
walks and talks?
It's been a little over two years. The eerie thing is that I don't know if it feels like two years, or longer
than that, or shorter. My sense of time seems to be melting, like a kid's snowman in a January thaw. It's
as if time as it always was - Eastern Standard Time, Daylight Saving Tune, Working-Man Time - doesn't
exist anymore. Here there is only Georgia Pines Time, which is Old Man Time, Old Lady Time, and Piss
the Bed Tune. The rest ... all gone.
This is a dangerous damned place. You don't you think it's only a boring dangerous as a nursery school at
naptime, but it's dangerous, all right. I've seen a lot of people slide into senility since I came here, and
sometimes they do more than slide sometimes they go down with the speed of a crash-diving submarine.
They come here mostly all right - dim-eyed and welded to the cane, maybe a little loose in the bladder,
but otherwise okay - and then something happens to them. A month later they're just sitting in the TV
room, staring up at Oprah Winfrey on the TV with dull eyes, a slack jaw, and a forgotten glass of orange
juice tilted and dribbling in one hand. A month after that, you have to tell them their kids' names when
the kids come to visit. And a month after that, it's their own damned names you have to refresh them on.
Something happens to them, all right: Georgia Pines Time happens to them. Time here is like a weak
acid that erases first memory and then the desire to go on living.
You have to fight it. That's what I tell Elaine Connelly, my special friend. It's gotten better for me since I
started writing about what happened to me in 1932, the year John Coffey came on the Green Mile. Some
of the memories are awful, but I can feel them sharpening my mind and my awareness the way a knife
sharpens a pencil, and that makes the pain worthwhile. Writing and memory alone aren't enough, though.
I also have a body, wasted and grotesque, though it may now be, and I exercise it as much as I can. It was
hard at first - old fogies like me aren't much shakes when it comes to exercise just for the sake of exercise
- but it's easier now that there's a purpose to my walks.
I go out before breakfast - as soon as it's light, most days - for my first stroll. It was raining this morning,
and the damp makes my joints ache, but I hooked a poncho from the rack by the kitchen door and went
out, anyway. When a man has a chore, he has to do it, and if it hurts, too bad. Besides, there are
compensations. The chief one is keeping that sense of Real Time, as opposed to Georgia Pines Time.
And I like the rain, aches or no aches. Especially in the early morning, when the day is young and seems
full of possibilities, even to a washed-up old boy like me.I went through the kitchen, stopping to beg two slices of toast from one of the sleepy-eyed cooks, and
then went out. I crossed the croquet course, then the weedy little putting green. Beyond that is a small
stand of woods, with a narrow path winding through it and a couple of sheds, no longer used and
mouldering away quietly, along the way. I walked down this path slowly, listening to the sleek and secret
patter of the rain in the pines, chewing away at a piece of toast with my few remaining teeth. My legs
ached, but it was a low ache, manageable. Mostly I felt pretty well. I drew the moist gray air as deep as I
could, taking it in like food.
And when I got to the second of those old sheds, I went in for awhile, and I took care of my business
there.
When I walked back up the path twenty minutes later, I could feel a worm of hunger stirring in my belly,
and thought I could eat something a little more substantial than toast. A dish of oatmeal, perhaps even a
scrambled egg with a sausage on the side. I love sausage, always have, but if I eat more than one these
days, I'm apt to get the squitters. One would be safe enough, though. Then, with my belly full and with
the damp air still perking up my brain (or so I hoped), I would go up to the solarium and write about the
execution of Eduard Delacroix. I would do it as fast as I could, so as not to lose my courage.
It was Mr. Jingles I was thinking about as I crossed the croquet course to the kitchen door - how Percy
Wetmore had stamped on him and broken his back, and how Delacroix had screamed when he realized
what his enemy had done - and I didn't see Brad Dolan standing there, half-hidden by the Dumpster, until
he reached out and grabbed my wrist.
"Out for a little stroll, Paulie?" he asked.
I jerked back from him, yanking my wrist out of his hand. Some of it was just being startled - anyone
will jerk when they're startled - but that wasn't all of it. I'd been thinking about Percy Wetmore,
remember, and it's Percy that Brad always reminds me of. Some of it's how Brad always goes around
with a paperback stuffed into his pocket (with Percy it was always a men's adventure magazine; with
Brad it's books of jokes that are only funny if you're stupid and mean-hearted), some of it's how he acts
like he's King Shit of Turd Mountain, but mostly it's that he's sneaky, and he likes to hurt.
He'd just gotten to work, I saw, hadn't even changed into his orderly's whites yet. He was wearing jeans
and a cheesy-looking Western-style shirt. In one hand was the remains of a Danish he'd hooked out of the
kitchen. He'd been standing under the leave, eating it where he wouldn't get wet. And where he could
watch for me, I'm pretty sure of that now. I'm pretty sure of something else, as well: I'll have to watch out
for Mr. Brad Dolan. He doesn't like me much. I don't know why, but I never knew why Percy Wetmore
didn't like Delacroix, either. And dislike is really too weak a word. Percy hated Del's guts from the very
first moment the little Frenchman came onto the Green Mile.
'"What's with this poncho you got on, Paulie?" he asked, flicking the collar. "This isn't yours."
"I got it in the hall outside the kitchen," I said. I hate it when he calls me Paulie, and I think he knows it,
but I was damned if I'd give him the satisfaction of seeing it. "There's a whole row of them. I'm not
hurting it any, would you say? Rain's what it's made for, after all."
"But it wasn't made for you, Paulie," he said, giving it another little flick. "That's the thing. Those
slickers're for the employees, not the residents.""I still don't see what harm it does."
He gave me a thin little smile. "It's not about harm, it's about the rules. What would life be without rules?
Paulie, Paulie, Paulie." He shook his head, as if just looking at me made him feel sorry to be alive. "You
probably think an old fart like you doesn't have to mind about the rules anymore, but that's just not true.
Paulie."
Smiling at me. Disliking me. Maybe even hating me. And why? I don't know. Sometimes there is no
why. That's the scary part.
"Well, I'm sorry if I broke the rules," I said. It came out sounding whiney, a little shrill, and I hated
myself for sounding that way, but I'm old, and old people whine easily. Old people scare easily.
Brad nodded. "Apology accepted. Now go hang that back up. You got no business out walking in the
rain, anyway. Specially not in those woods. What if you were to slip and fall and break your damned hip?
Huh? Who do you think'd have to hoss your elderly freight back up the hill?"
"I don't know," I said. I just wanted to get away from him. The more I listened to him, the more he
sounded like Percy. William Wharton, the crazyman who came to the Green Mile in the fall of `32, once
grabbed Percy and scared him so bad that Percy squirted in his pants. You talk about this to anyone,
Percy told the rest of us afterward, and you'll all be on the breadlines in a week. Now, these many years
later, I could almost hear Brad Dolan saying those same words, in that same tone of voice. It's as if, by
writing about those old times, I have unlocked some unspeakable door that connects the past to the
present - Percy Wetmore to Brad Dolan, Janice Edgecombe to Elaine Connelly, Cold Mountain
Penitentiary to the Georgia Pines old folks' home. And if that thought doesn't keep me awake tonight, I
guess nothing will.
I made as if to go in through the kitchen door and Brad grabbed me by the wrist again. I don't know
about the first one, but this time he was doing it on purpose, squeezing to hurt. His eyes shifting back and
forth, making sure no one was around in the early-morning wet, no one to see he was abusing one of the
old folks he was supposed to be taking care of.
"What do you do down that path?" he asked. "I know you don't go down there and jerk off, those days
are long behind you, so what do you do?"
"Nothing," I said, telling myself to be calm, not to show him how bad he was hurting me and to be calm,
to remember he'd only mentioned the path, he didn't know about the shed. "I just walk. To clear my
mind"
"Too late for that, Paulie, your mind's never gonna be clear again!' He squeezed my thin old mares wrist
again, grinding the brittle bones, eyes continually shifting from side to side, wanting to make sure he was
safe. Brad wasn't afraid of breaking the rules; he was only afraid of being caught breaking them. And in
that, too, he was like Percy Wetmore, who would never let you forget he was the governor's nephew.
"Old as you are, its a miracle you can remember who you are. You're too goddam old. Even for a
museum like this. You give me the fucking creeps, Paulie."
"Let go of me," I said, trying to keep the whine out of my voice. It wasn't just pride, either. I thought if he
heard it, it might inflame him, the way the smell of sweat can sometimes inflame a bad-tempered dog -
one which would otherwise only growl - to bite. That made me think of a reporter who'd covered JohnCoffey's trial. The reporter was a terrible man named Hammersmith, and the most terrible thing about
him was that he hadn't known he was terrible.
Instead of letting go, Dolan squeezed my wrist again. I groaned. I didn't want to, but I couldn't help it. It
hurt all the way down to my ankles.
"What do you do down there, Paulie? Tell me."
"Nothing!" I said. I wasn't crying, not yet, but I was afraid I'd start soon if he kept bearing down like that.
"Nothing, I just walk, I like to walk, let go of me!"
He did, but only long enough so he could grab my other hand. That one was rolled closed. "Open up," he
said. "Let Poppa see."
I did, and he grunted with disgust. It was nothing but the remains of my second piece of toast. I'd
clenched it in my right hand when he started squeezing my left wrist, and there was butter - well, oleo,
they don't have real butter here, of course - on my fingers.
"Go on inside and wash your damned hands," he said, stepping back and taking another bite of his
Danish. "Jesus Christ."
I went up the steps. My legs were shaking, my heart pounding like an engine with leaky valves and shaky
old pistons. As I grasped the knob that would let me into the kitchen - and safety - Dolan said: "If you tell
anyone I squeezed your po' old wrist, Paulie, I'll tell them you're having delusions. Onset of senile
dementia, likely. And you know they'll believe me. If there are bruises, they'll think you made them
yourself."
Yes. Those things were true. And once again, it could have been Percy Wetmore saying them, a Percy
that had somehow stayed young and mean while I'd grown old and brittle."I'm not going to say anything to anyone," I mutered. "Got nothing to say."
"That's right, you old sweetie." His voice light and mocking, the voice of a lugoon (to use Percy's word)
who thought he was going to be young forever. "And I'm going to find out what you're up to. I'm going
to make it my business. You hear?"
I heard, all right, but wouldn't give him the satisfaction of saying so. I went in, passed through the
kitchen (I could now smell eggs and sausage cooking, but no longer wanted any), and hung the poncho
back up on its hook. Then I went upstairs to my room - resting at every step, giving my heart time to
slow - and gathered my writing materials together.
I went down to the solarium and was just sitting at the little table by the windows when my friend Elaine
poked her head in. She looked tired, and, I thought, unwell. She'd combed her hair out but was still in her
robe. We old sweeties don't stand much on ceremony; for the most part, we can't afford to.
"I won't disturb you," she said, "I see you're getting set to write-"
"Don't be silly," I said. "I've got more time than Carter's got liver pills. Come on in."
She did, but stood by the door. "It's just that I couldn't sleep - again - and happened to be looking out my
window a little earlier ... and ...""And you saw Mr. Dolan and me having our pleasant little chat," I said. I hoped seeing was all she'd
done; that her window had been closed and she hadn't heard me whining to be let go.
"It didn't look pleasant and it didn't look friendly," she said. "Paul, that Mr. Dolan's been asking around
about you. He asked me about you - last week, this was. I didn't think much about it then, just that he's
got himself a nasty long nose for other people's business, but now I wonder."
"Asking about me?" I hoped I didn't sound as uneasy as I felt. "Asking what?"
"Where you go walking, for one thing. And why you go walking."
I tried to laugh. "There's a man who doesn't believe in exercise, that much is clear."
"He thinks you've got a secret." She paused. "So do I."
I opened my mouth - to say what, I don't know - but Elaine raised one of her gnarled but oddly beautiful
hands before I could get a single word out. "If you do, I don't want to know what it is, Paul. Your
business is your business. I was raised to think that way, but not everyone was. Be careful. That's all I
want to tell you. And now I'll let you alone to do your work."
She turned to go, but before she could get out the door, I called her name. She turned back, eyes
questioning.
"When I finish what I'm writing-" I began, then shook my head a little. That was wrong. "If I finish what
I'm writing, would you read it?"
She seemed to consider, then gave me the sort of smile a man could easily fall in love with, even a man
as old as me. "That would be my honor."
"You'd better wait until you read it before you talk about honor," I said, and it was Delacroix's death I
was thinking of.
"I'll read it, though," she said. "Every word. I promise. But you have to finish writing it, first."
She left me to it, but it was a long time before I wrote anything. I sat staring out the windows for almost
an hour, tapping my pen against the side of the table, watching the gray day brighten a little at a time,
thinking about Brad Dolan, who calls me Paulie and never tires of jokes about chinks and slopes and
spicks and micks, thinking about what Elaine Connelly had said. He thinks you've got a secret. So do I.
And maybe I do. Yes, maybe I do. And of course Brad Dolan wants it. Not because he thinks it's
important (and it's not, I guess, except to me), but because he doesn't think very old men like myself
should have secrets. No taking the ponchos off the hook outside the kitchen; no secrets, either. No getting
the idea that the likes of us are still human. And why shouldn't we be allowed such an idea? He doesn't
know. And in that, too, he is like Percy.
So my thoughts, like a river that takes an oxbow turn, finally led back to where they had been when Brad
Dolan reached out from beneath the kitchen eave and grabbed my wrist: to Percy, mean-spirited Percy
Wetmore, and how he had taken his revenge on the man who had laughed at him. Delacroix had been
throwing the colored spool he had - the one Mr. Jingles would fetch - and it bounced out of the cell and
into the corridor. That was all it took; Percy saw his chance.2.
"No you fool!" Brutal yelled, but Percy paid no attention. Just as Mr. Jingles reached the spool - too
intent on it to realize his old enemy was at hand - Percy brought the sole of one hard black workshoe
down on him. There was an audible snap as Mr. Jingles's back broke, and blood gushed from his mouth.
His tiny black eyes bulged in their sockets, and in them I read an expression of surprised agony that was
all too human.
Delacroix screamed with horror and grief. He threw himself at the door of his cell and thrust his arms out
through the bars, reaching as far as he could, crying the mouse's name over and over.
Percy turned toward him, smiling. Toward me and Brutal, as well. "There," he said. "I knew I'd get him,
sooner or later. just a matter of time, really." He turned and walked back up the Green Mile, leaving Mr.
Jingles lying on the linoleum, his spreading blood red over green.
Dean got up from the duty desk, hitting the side of it with his knee and knocking the cribbage board to
the floor. The pegs spilled out of their holes and rolled in all directions. Neither Dean nor Harry, who had
been just about to go out, paid the slightest attention to the overturn of the game. "What'd you do this
time?" Dean shouted at Percy. "What the hell'd you do this time, you stoopnagel?"
Percy didn't answer. He strode past the desk without saying a word, patting his hair with his fingers. He
went through my office and into the storage shed. William Wharton answered for him. "Boss Dean? I
think what he did was teach a certain french-fry it ain't smart to laugh at him," he said, and then began to
laugh himself. It was a good laugh, a country laugh, cheery and deep. There were people I met during
that period of my life (very scary people, for the most part) who only sounded normal when they
laughed. Wild Bill Wharton was one of those.
I looked down at the mouse again, stunned. It was still breathing, but there were little minute beads of
blood caught in the filaments of its whiskers, and a dull glaze was creeping over its previously brilliant
oildrop eyes. Brutal picked up the colored spool, looked at it, then looked at me. He looked as
dumbfounded as I felt. Behind us, Delacroix went on screaming out his grief and horror. It wasn't just the
mouse, of course; Percy had smashed a hole in Delacroix's defenses and all his terror was pouring out.
But Mr. Jingles was the focusing point for those pent-up feelings, and it was terrible to listen to him.
"Oh no," he cried over and over again, amid the screams and the garbled pleas and prayers in Cajun
French. "Oh no, oh no, poor Mr. Jingles, poor old Mr. Jingles, oh no.""Give im to me."
I looked up, puzzled by that deep voice, at first not sure who it belonged to. I saw John Coffey. Like
Delacroix, he had put his arms through the bars of his cell door, but unlike Del, he wasn't waving them
around. He simply held them out as far as he could, the hands at the ends of them open. It was a
purposeful pose, an almost urgent pose. And his voice, had the same quality, which was why, I suppose, I
didn't recognize it as belonging to Coffey at first. He seemed a different man from the lost, weepy soul
that had occupied this cell for the last few weeks.
"Give im to me, Mr. Edgecombe! While there's still time!"
Then I remembered what he'd done for me, and understood. I supposed it couldn't hurt, but I didn't think
it would do much good, either. When I picked the mouse up, I winced at the feel-there were so manysplintered bones poking at various spots on Mr. Jingles's hide that it was like picking up a fur-covered
pincushion. This was no urinary infection. Still -
"What are you doing?" Brutal asked as I put Mr. Jingles in Coffey's huge right hand. "What the hell?"
Coffey pulled the mouse back through the bars. He lay limp on Coffey's palm, tail hanging over the arc
between Coffey's thumb and first finger, the tip twitching weakly in midair. Then Coffey covered his
right hand with his left, creating a kind of cup in which the mouse lay. We could no longer see Mr.
Jingles himself, only the tail, hanging down and twitching at the tip like a dying pendulum. Coffey lifted
his hands toward his face, spreading the fingers of the right as he did so, creating spaces like those
between prison bars. The tail of the mouse now hung from the side of his hands that was facing us.
Brutal stepped next to me, still holding the colored spool between his fingers. "What's he think he's
doing?"
"Shh," I said.
Delacroix had stopped screaming. "Please, John," he whispered. "Oh Johnny, help him, please help him,
oh s'il vous plait."
Dean and Harry joined us, Harry with our old deck of Airplane cards still in one hand. "What's going
on?" Dean asked, but I only shook my head. I was feeling hypnotized again, damned if I wasn't.
Coffey put his mouth between two of his fingers and inhaled sharply. For a moment everything hung
suspended. Then he raised his head away from his hands and I saw the face of a man who looked
desperately sick, or in terrible pain. His eyes were sharp and blazing; his upper teeth bit at his full lower
lip; his dark face had faded to an unpleasant color that looked like ash stirred into mud. He made a
choked sound way back in his throat.
"Dear Jesus Lord and Savior," Brutal whispered. His eyes appeared to be in danger of dropping right out
of his face.
"What?" Harry almost barked. "What?"
"The tail! Don't you see it? The tail!"
Mr. Jingles's tail was no longer a dying pendulum; it was snapping briskly from side to side, like the tail
of a cat in a bird-catching mood. And then, from inside Coffey's cupped hands, came a perfectly familiar
squeak.
Coffey made that choking, gagging sound again, then turned his head to one side like a man that has
coughed up a wad of phlegm and means to spit it out. Instead, he exhaled a cloud of black insects - I
think they were insects, and the others said the same, but to this day I am not sure - from his mouth and
nose. They boiled around him in a dark cloud that temporarily obscured his features.
"Christ, what're those?" Dean asked in a shrill, scared voice.
"It's all right," I heard myself say. "Don't panic, it's all right, in a few seconds they'll be gone."
As when Coffey had cured my urinary infection for me, the "bugs" turned white and then disappeared.
"Holy shit," Harry whispered."Paul?" Brutal asked in an unsteady voice. "Paul?"
Coffey looked okay again - like a fellow who has successfully coughed up a wad of meat that has been
choking him. He bent down, put his cupped hands on the floor, peeked through his fingers, then opened
them. Mr. Jingles, absolutely all right-not a single twist to his backbone, not a single lump poking at his
hide - ran out. He paused for a moment at the door of Coffey's cell, then ran across the Green Mile to
Delacroix's cell. As he went, I noticed there were still beads of blood in his whiskers.
Delacroix gathered him up, laughing and crying at the same time, covering the mouse with shameless,
smacking kisses. Dean and Harry and Brutal watched with silent wonder. Then Brutal stepped forward
and handed the colored spool through the bars. Delacroix didn't see it at first; he was too taken up with
Mr. Jingles. He was like a father whose son has been saved from drowning. Brutal tapped him on the
shoulder with the spool. Delacroix looked, saw it, took it, and went back to Mr. Jingles again, stroking
his fur and devouring him with his eyes, needing to constantly refresh his perception that yes, the mouse
was all right, the mouse was whole and fine and all right.
"Toss it," Brutal said. "I want to see how he runs."
"He all right, Boss Howell, he all right, praise God--!"
"Toss it," Brutal repeated. "Mind me, Del."
Delacroix bent, clearly reluctant, clearly not wanting to let Mr. Jingles out of his hands again, at least not
yet. Then, very gently, he tossed the spool. It rolled across the cell, past the Corona cigar box, and to the
wall. Mr. Jingles was after it, but not quite with the speed he had shown previously. He appeared to be
limping just a bit on his left rear leg, and that was what struck me the hardest - it was, I suppose, what
made it real. That little limp.
He got to the spool, though, got to it just fine and nosed it back to Delacroix with all his old enthusiasm. I
turned to John Coffey, who was standing at his cell door and smiling. It was a tired smile, and not what
I'd call really happy, but the sharp urgency I'd seen in his face as he begged for the mouse to be given to
him was gone, and so was the look of pain and fear, as if he were choking. It was our john Coffey again,
with his not-quite-there face and strange, far-looking eyes.
"You helped it," I said. "Didn't you, big boy?"
"That's right," Coffey said. The smile widened a little, and for a moment or two it was happy. "I helped
it. I helped Del's mouse. I helped ..." He trailed off, unable to remember the name.
"Mr. Jingles," Dean said. He was looking at John with careful, wondering eyes, as if he expected Coffey
to burst into flames or maybe begin to float in his cell.
"That's right," Coffey said. "Mr. Jingles. He's a circus mouse. Goan live in ivy-glass."
"You bet your bobcat," Harry said, joining us in looking at John Coffey. Behind us, Delacroix lay down
on his bunk with Mr. Jingles on his chest. Del was crooning to him, singing him some French song that
sounded like a lullaby.
Coffey looked up the Green Mile toward the duty desk and the door which led into my office and the
storage room beyond. "Boss Percy's bad," he said. "Boss Percy's mean. He stepped on Del's mouse. Hestepped on Mr. Jingles."
And then, before we could say anything else to him - if we could have thought of anything to say - John
Coffey went back to his bunk, lay down, and rolled on his side to face the wall.
3.
Percy was standing with his back to us when Brutal and I came into the storage room about twenty
minutes later. He had found a can of paste furniture polish on a shelf above the hamper where we put our
dirty uniforms (and, sometimes, our civilian clothes; the prison laundry didn't care what it washed), and
was polishing the oak arms and legs of the electric chair. This probably sounds bizarre to you, perhaps
even macabre, but to Brutal and me, it seemed the most normal thing Percy had done all night. Old
Sparky would be meeting his public tomorrow, and. Percy would at least appear to be in charge.
"Percy," I said quietly.
He turned the little tune he'd been humming dying in his throat, and looked at us. I didn't see the fear I'd
expected, at least not at first. I realized that Percy looked older, somehow. And, I thought, John Coffey
was right. He looked mean. Meanness is like an addicting drug - no one on earth is more qualified to say
that than me - and I thought that, after a certain amount of experimentation, Percy had gotten hooked on
it. He liked what he had done to Delacroix's mouse. What he liked even more was Delacroix's dismayed
screams.
"Don't start in on me," he said in a tone of voice that was almost pleasant. "I mean, hey, it was just a
mouse. It never belonged here in the first place, as you boys well know."
"The mouse is fine," I said. My heart was thumping hard in my chest but I made my voice come out
mild, almost disinterested. "Just fine. Running and squeaking and chasing its spool again. You're no
better at mouse-killing than you are at most of the other things you do around here."
He was looking at me, amazed and disbelieving. "You expect me to believe that? The goddam thing
crunched! I heard it! So you can just---!"
"Shut up."
He stared at me, his eyes wide. "What? What did you say to me?"
I took a step closer to him. I could feel a vein throbbing in the middle of my forehead. I couldn't
remember the last time I'd felt so angry. "Aren't you glad Mr. Jingles is okay? After all the talks we've
had about how our job is to keep the prisoners calm, especially when it gets near the end for them, I
thought you'd be glad. Relieved. With Del having to take the walk tomorrow, and all."
Percy looked from me to Brutal, his studied calmness dissolving into uncertainty. "What the hell game
do you boys think you're playing?" he asked.
"None of this is a game, my friend," Brutal said. "You thinking it is ... well, that's just one of the reasons
you can't be trusted. You want to know the absolute truth? I think you're a pretty sad case."
"You want to watch it," Percy said. Now there was a rawness in his voice. Fear creeping back in, after all
- fear of what we might want with him, fear of what we might be up to. I was glad to hear it. It would
make him easier to deal with. "I know people. Important people.""So you say, but you're such a dreamer," Brutal said. He sounded as if he was on the verge of laughter.
Percy dropped the polishing rag onto the seat of the chair with the clamps attached to the arms and legs.
"I killed that mouse," he said in a voice that was not quite steady.
"Go on and check for yourself," I said. "It's a free country."
"I will," he said. "I will."
He stalked past us, mouth set, small hands (Wharton was right, they were pretty) fiddling with his comb.
He went up the steps and ducked through into my office. Brutal and I stood by Old Sparky, waiting for
him to come back and not talking. I don't know about Brutal, but I couldn't think of a thing to say. I didn't
even know how to think about what we had just seen.
Three minutes passed. Brutal picked up Percy's rag and began to polish the thick back-slats of the electric
chair. He had time to finish one and start another before Percy came back. He stumbled and almost fell
coming down the steps from the office to the storageroom floor, and when he crossed to us he came at an
uneven strut. His face was shocked and unbelieving.
"You switched them," he said in a shrill, accusatory voice. "You switched mice somehow, you bastards.
You're playing with me, and you're going to be goddam sorry if you don't stop! I'll see you on the
goddam breadlines if you don't stop! Who do you think you are?"
He quit, panting for breath, his hands clenched.
"I'll tell you who we are," I said. "We're the people you work with, Percy ... but not for very much
longer." I reached out and clamped my hands on his shoulders. Not real hard; but it was a clamp, all
right. Yes it was.
Percy reached up to break it. "Take your-"
Brutal grabbed his right hand - the whole thing, small and soft and white, disappeared into Brutal's
tanned fist. "Shut up your cakehole, sonny. If you know what's good for you, you'll take this one last
opportunity to dig the wax out of your ears."
I turned him around, lifted him onto the platform, then backed him up until the backs of his knees struck
the seat of the electric chair and he had to sit down. His calm was gone; the meanness and the arrogance,
too. Those things were real enough, but you have to remember that Percy was very young. At his age
they were still only a thin veneer, like an ugly shade of enamel paint. You could still chip through. And I
judged that Percy was now ready to listen.
"I want your word," I said.
"My word about what?" His mouth was still trying to sneer, but his eyes were terrified. The power in the
switch room was locked off, but Old Sparky's wooden seat had its own power, and right then I judged
that Percy was feeling it.
"Your word that if we put you out front for it tomorrow night, you'll really go on to Briar Ridge and
leave us alone," Brutal said, speaking with a vehemence I had never heard from him before. "That you'll
put in for a transfer the very next day.""And if I won't? If I should just call up certain people and tell them you're harassing me and threatening
me? Bullying me?"
"We might get the bum's rush if your connections are as good as you seem to think they are," I said, "but
we'd make sure you left your fair share of blood on the floor, too, Percy."
"About that mouse? Huh! You think anyone is going to care that I stepped on a condemned murderer's
pet mouse? Outside of this looneybin, that is?"
"No. But three men saw you just standing there with your thumb up your ass while Wild Bill Wharton
was trying to strangle Dean Stanton with his wrist-chains. About that people will care, Percy, I promise
you. About that even your offsides uncle the governor is going to care."Percy's cheeks and brow flushed a patchy red. "You think they'd believe you?" he asked, but his voice
had lost a lot of its angry force. Clearly he thought someone might believe us. And Percy didn't like
being in trouble. Breaking the rules was okay. Getting caught breaking them was not.
"Well, I've got some photos of Dean's neck before the bruising went down," Brutal said - I had no idea if
this was true or not, but it certainly sounded good. "You know what those pix say? That Wharton got a
pretty good shot at it before anyone pulled him off, although you were right there, and on Wharton's
blind side. You'd have some hard questions to answer, wouldn't you? And a thing like that could follow a
man for quite a spell. Chances are it'd still be there long after his relatives were out of the state capital
and back home drinking mint juleps on the front porch. A man's work-record can be a mighty interesting
thing, and a lot of people get a chance to look at it over the course of a lifetime."
Percy's eyes flicked back and forth mistrustfully between us. His left hand went to his hair and smoothed
it. He said nothing, but I thought we almost had him.
"Come on, let's quit this," I said. "You don't want to be here any more than we want you here, isn't that
so?"
"I hate it here!" he burst out. "I hate the way you treat me, the way you never gave me a chance!"
That last was far from true, but I judged this wasn't the time to argue the matter.
"But I don't like to be pushed around, either. My Daddy taught me that once you start down that road you
most likely end up letting people push you around your whole life." His eyes, not as pretty as his hands
but almost, flashed. "I especially don't like being pushed around by big apes like this guy." He glanced at
my old friend and grunted. "Brutal - you got the right nickname, at least."
"You have to understand something, Percy," I said. "The way we look at it, you've been pushing us
around. We keep telling you the way we do things around here and you keep doing things your own way,
then hiding behind your political connections when things turn out wrong. Stepping on Delacroix's
mouse---" Brutal caught my eye and I backtracked in a hurry. "Trying to step on Delacroix's mouse is
just a case in point. You push and push and push; we're finally pushing back, that's all. But listen, if you
do right, you'll come out of this looking good - like a young man on his way up - and smelling like a
rose. Nobody'll ever know about this little talk we're having. So what do you say? Act like a grownup.
Promise you'll leave after Del."
He thought it over. And after a moment or two, a look came into his eyes, the sort of look a fellow getswhen he's just had a good idea. I didn't like it much, because any idea which seemed good to Percy
wouldn't seem good to us.
"If nothing else," Brutal said, "just think how nice it'd be to get away from that sack of pus Wharton."
Percy nodded, and I let him get out of the chair. He straightened his uniform shirt, tucked it in at the
back, gave his hair a pass-through with his comb. Then he looked at us. "Okay, I agree. I'm out front for
Del tomorrow night; I'll put in for Briar Ridge the very next day. We call it quits right there. Good
enough?" "Good enough," I said. That look was still in his eyes, but right then I was too relieved to care.
He stuck out his hand. "Shake on it?" I did. So did Brutal. More fools us.
4.
The next day was the thickest yet, and the last of our strange October heat. Thunder was rumbling in the
west when I came to work, and the dark clouds were beginning to stack up there. They moved closer as
the night came down, and we could see blue-white forks of lightning jabbing out of them. There was a
tornado in Trapingus County around ten that night - it killed four people and tore the roof off the livery
stable in Tefton - and vicious thunderstorms and gale-force winds at Cold Mountain. Later it seemed to
me as if the very heavens had protested the bad death of Eduard Delacroix.
Everything went just fine to begin with. Del had spent a quiet day in his cell, sometimes playing with Mr.
Jingles but mostly just lying on his bunk and petting him. Wharton tried to get trouble started a couple of
times - once he hollered down to Del about the mousieburgers they were going to have after old Lucky
Pierre was dancing the two-step in hell - but the little Cajun didn't respond and Wharton, apparently
deciding that was his best shot, gave it up.
At quarter past ten, Brother Schuster showed up and delighted us all by saying he would recite the Lord's
Prayer with Del in Cajun French. It seemed like a good omen. In that we were wrong, of course.
The witnesses began to arrive around eleven, most talking in low tones about the impending weather, and
speculating about the possibility of a power outage postponing the electrocution. None of them seemed to
know that Old Sparky ran off a generator, and unless that took a direct lightning-hit, the show would go
on. Harry was in the switch room that night, so he and Bill Dodge and Percy Wetmore acted as ushers,
seeing folks into their seats and asking each one if he'd like a cold drink of water. There were two women
present: the sister of the girl Del had raped and murdered, and the mother of one of the fire victims. The
latter lady was large and pale and determined. She told Harry Terwilliger that she hoped the man she'd
come to see was good and scared, that he knew the fires in the furnace were stoked for him, and that
Satan's imps, were waiting for him. Then she burst into tears and buried her face in a lace hanky that was
almost the size of a pillowslip.
Thunder, hardly muffled at all by the tin roof, banged harsh and loud. People glanced up uneasily. Men
who looked uncomfortable wearing ties this late at night wiped at their florid cheeks. It was hotter than
blue blazes in the storage shed. And, of course, they kept turning their eyes to Old Sparky. They might
have made jokes about this chore earlier in the week, but the jokes were gone by eleven-thirty or so that
night. I started all this by telling you that the humor went out of the situation in a hurry for the people
who had to sit down in that oak chair, but the condemned prisoners weren't the only ones who lost the
smiles off their faces when the time actually came. It just seemed so bald, somehow, squatting up there
on its platform, with the clamps on the legs sticking off to either side, looking like the things a person
with polio would have to wear. There wasn't much talk, and when the thunder boomed again, as sharpand personal as a splintering tree, the sister of Delacroix's victim gave a little scream. The last person to
take his seat in the witness's section was Curtis Anderson, Warden Moores's stand-in.
At eleven-thirty, I approached Delacroix's cell with Brutal and Dean walking slightly behind me. Del was
sitting on his bunk, with Mr. Jingles in his lap. The mouse's head was stretched forward toward the
condemned man, his little oilspot eyes rapt on Del's face. Del was stroking the top of Mr. Jingles's head
between his ears. Large silent tears were rolling down Del's face, and it was these the mouse seemed to
be peering at. Del looked up at the sound of our footsteps. He was very pale. From behind me, I sensed
rather than saw John Coffey standing at his cell door, watching.
Del winced at the sound of my keys clashing against metal, but held steady, continuing to stroke Mr.
Jingles's head, as I turned the locks and ran the door open.
"Hi dere, Boss Edgecombe," he said. "Hi dere, boys. Say hi, Mr. Jingles." But Mr. Jingles only continued
to look raptly up at the balding little man's face, as if wondering at the source of his tears. The colored
spool had been neatly laid aside in the Corona box - laid aside for the last time, I thought, and felt a pang.
"Eduard Delacroix, as an officer of the court..."
"Boss Edgecombe?"
I thought about just running on with the set speech, then thought again. "What is it, Del?"
He held the mouse out to me. "Here. Don't let nothing happen to Mr. Jingles."
"Del, I don't think he'll come to me. He's not - "
"Mais oui, he say he will. He say he know all about you, Boss Edgecombe, and you gonna take him
down to dat place in Florida where the mousies do their tricks. He say he trust you." He held his hand out
farther, and I'll be damned if the mouse didn't step off his palm and onto my shoulder. It was so light I
couldn't even feel it through my uniform coat, but I sensed it, like a small heat. "And boss? Don't let that
bad 'un near him again. Don't let that bad 'un hurt my mouse."
"No, Del. I won't." The question was, what was I supposed to do with him right then? I couldn't very well
march Delacroix past the witnesses with a mouse perched on my shoulder."I'll take him, boss," a voice rumbled from behind me. It was John Coffey's voice, and it was eerie the
way it came right then, as though he had read my mind. "Just for now. If Del don't mind."
Del nodded, relieved. "Yeah, you take im, John, 'til dis foolishment done - bien! And den after ..." His
gaze shifted back to Brutal and me. "You gonna take him down to Florida. To dat Mouseville Place."
"Yeah, most likely Paul and I will do it together," Brutal said, watching with a troubled and unquiet eye
as Mr. Jingles stepped off my shoulder and into Coffey's huge outstretched palm. Mr. Jingles did this
with no protest or attempt to run; indeed, he scampered as readily up John Coffey's arm as he had stepped
onto my shoulder. "We'll take some of our vacation time. Won't we, Paul?"
I nodded. Del nodded, too, eyes bright, just a trace of a smile on his lips. "People pay a dime apiece to
see him. Two cents for the kiddies. Ain't dat right, Boss,Howell?"
"That's right, Del.""You a good man, Boss Howell," Del said. "You, too, Boss Edgecombe. You yell at me sometimes, oui,
but not 'less you have to. You all good men except for dat Percy. I wish I coulda met you someplace else.
Mauvais temps, mauvaise chance."
"I got something to say to you, Del,- I told him. "They're just the words I have to say to everyone before
we walk. No big deal, but it's part of my job. Okay?"
"Oui, monsieur," he said, and looked at Mr. Jingles, perched on John Coffey's broad shoulder, for the last
time. "Au revoir, mon ami," he said, beginning to cry harder. "le t'aime, mon petit." He blew the mouse a
kiss. It should have been funny, that blown kiss, or maybe just grotesque, but it wasn't. I met Dean's eye
for a moment, then had to look away. Dean stared down the corridor toward the restraint room and
smiled strangely I believe he was on the verge of tears. As for me, I said what I had to say, beginning
with the part about how I was an officer of the court, and when I was done, Delacroix stepped out of his
cell for the last time.
"Hold on a second longer, hoss," Brutal said, and checked the crown of Del's head, where the cap would
go. He nodded at me, then clapped Del on the shoulder. "Right with Eversharp. We're on our way."
So Eduard Delacroix took his last walk on the Green Mile with little streams of mingled sweat and tears
running down his cheeks and big thunder rolling in the sky overhead. Brutal walked on the condemned
man's left, I was on his right, Dean was to the rear.
Schuster was in my office, with guards Ringgold and Battle standing in the corners and keeping watch.
Schuster looked up at Del, smiled, and then addressed him in French. It sounded stilted to me, but it
worked wonders. Del smiled back, then went to Schuster, put his arms around him, hugged him.
Ringgold and Battle tensed, but I raised my hands to them and shook my head.
Schuster listened to Del's flood of tear-choked French, nodded as if he understood perfectly, and patted
him on the back. He looked at me over the little man's shoulder and said, "I hardly understand a quarter
of what he's saying."
"Don't think it matters," Brutal rumbled.
"Neither do I, son," Schuster said with a grin. He was the best of them, and now I realize I have no idea
what became of him. I hope he kept his faith, whatever else befell.
He urged Delacroix onto his knees, then folded his hands. Delacroix did the same.
"Not' Pere, qui etes aux cieux," Schuster began, and Delacroix joined him. They spoke the Lord's Prayer
together in that liquid-sounding Cajun French, all the way to "mais deliverez-nous du mal, ainsi soit-il."
By then, Del's tears had mostly stopped and he looked calm. Some Bible verses (in English) followed,
not neglecting the old standby about the still waters. When that was done, Schuster started to get up, but
Del held onto the sleeve of his shirt and said something in French. Schuster listened carefully, frowning.
He responded. Del said something else, then just looked at him hopefully.
Schuster turned to me and said: "He's got something else, Mr. Edgecombe. A prayer I can't help him
with, because of my faith. Is it all right?"
I looked at the clock on the wall and saw it was seventeen minutes to midnight. "Yes," I said, "but it'll
have to be quick. We've got a schedule to keep here, you know.""Yes. I do." He turned to Delacroix and gave him a nod.
Del closed his eyes as if to pray, but for a moment said nothing. A frown creased his forehead and I had a
sense of him reaching far back in his mind, as a man may search a small attic room for an object which
hasn't been used (or needed) for a long, long time. I glanced at the clock again and almost said something
- would have, if Brutal hadn't twitched my sleeve and shaken his head.Then Del began, speaking softly but quickly in that Cajun which was as round and soft and sensual as a
young woman's breast: "Marie! le vous salue, Marie, oui, pleine de grace; le Seigneur est avec vous;
vous etes benie entre toutes les femmes, et mon cher Jesus, le fruit de vos entrailles, est beni." He was
crying again, but I don't think he knew it. "Sainte Marie,6 ma mere, Mere de Dieu, priez pour moi, priez
pour nous, pauv' pecheurs, maint'ant et l'heure ... l'heure de notre mort. L'heure de mon mort." He took a
deep, shuddering breath. "Ainsi soit-il."
Lightning spilled through the room's one window in a brief blue-white glare as Delacroix got to his feet.
Everyone jumped and cringed except for Del himself; he still seemed lost in the old prayer. He reached
out with one hand, not looking to see where it went. Brutal took it and squeezed it briefly. Delacroix
looked at him and smiled a little. "Nous voyons - " he began, then stopped. With a conscious effort, he
switched back to English. "We can go now, Boss Howell, Boss Edgecombe. I'm right wit God,"
"That's good," I said, wondering how right with God Del was going to feel twenty minutes from now,
when he stood on the other side of the electricity. I hoped his last prayer had been heard, and that Mother
Mary was praying for him with all her heart and soul, because Eduard Delacroix, rapist and murderer,
right then needed all the praying he could get his hands on. Outside, thunder bashed across the sky again.
"Come on, Del. Not far now."
"Fine, boss, dat fine. Because I ain't ascairt no more." So he said, but I saw in his eyes that - Our Father
or no Our Father, Hail Mary or no Hail Mary - he lied. By the time they cross the rest of the green carpet
and duck through the little door, almost all of them are scared.
"Stop at the bottom, Del," I told him in a low voice as he went through, but it was advice I needn't have
given him. He stopped at the foot of the stairs, all right, stopped cold, and what did it was the sight of
Percy Wetmore standing there on the platform, with the sponge-bucket by one foot and the phone that
went to the governor just visible beyond his right hip.
"Non," Del said in a low, horrified voice. "Non, non, not him!"
"Walk on," Brutal said. "You just keep your eyes on me and Paul. Forget he's there at all."
"But-"
People had turned to look at us, but by moving my body a bit, I could still grip Delacroix's left elbow
without being seen. "Steady," I said in a voice only Del - and perhaps Brutal - could hear. "The only
thing most of these people will remember about you is how you go out, so give them something good."
The loudest crack of thunder yet broke overhead at that moment, loud enough to make the storage room's
tin roof vibrate. Percy jumped as if someone had goosed him, and Del gave a small, contemptuous snort
of laughter. "It get much louder dan dat, he gonna piddle in his pants again," he said, and then squared
his shoulders - not that he had much to square. "Come on. Let's get it over."We walked to the platform. Delacroix ran a nervous eye over the witnesses - about twenty-five of them
this time - as we went, but Brutal, Dean, and I kept our own eyes trained on the chair. All looked in order
to me. I raised one thumb and a questioning eyebrow to Percy, who gave a little one-sided grimace, as if
to say What do you mean, is everything all right? Of course it is.
I hoped he was right.
Brutal and I reached automatically for Delacroix's elbows as he stepped up onto the platform. It's only
eight or so inches up from the floor, but you'd be surprised how many of them, even the toughest of
tough babies, need help to make that last step up of their lives.
Del did okay, though. He stood in front of the chair for a moment (resolutely not looking at Percy), then
actually spoke to it, as if introducing himself: "C'est moi," he said. Percy reached for him, but Delacroix
turned around on his own and sat down. I knelt on what was now his left side, and Brutal knelt on his
right. I guarded my crotch and my throat in the manner I have already described, then swung the clamp
in so that its open jaws encircled the skinny white flesh just above the Cajun's ankle. Thunder bellowed
and I jumped. Sweat ran in my eye, stinging. Mouseville, I kept thinking for some reason. Mouseville,
and how it cost a dime to get in. Two cents for the kiddies, who would look at Mr. Jingles through his
ivy-glass windows.
The clamp was balky, wouldn't shut. I could hear Del breathing in great dry pulls of air, lungs that would
be charred bags less than four minutes from now laboring to keep up with his fear-driven heart. The fact
that he had killed half a dozen people seemed at that moment the least important thing about him. I'm not
trying to say anything about right and wrong here, but only to tell how it was.
Dean knelt next to me and whispered, "What's wrong, Paul?"
"I can't--" I began, and then the clamp closed with an audible snapping sound. It must have also pinched
a fold of Delacroixs skin in its jaws, because he flinched and made a little hissing noise. "Sorry," I said.
"It okay, boss," Del said. "It only gonna hurt for a minute."
Brutal's side had the clamp with the electrode in it, which always took a little longer, and so we stood up,
all three of us, at almost exactly the same time. Dean reached for the wrist-clamp on Del's left, and Percy
went to the one on his right. I was ready to move forward if Percy should need help, but he did better
with his wrist-clamp than I'd done with my ankle-clamp. I could see Del trembling all over now, as if a
low current were already passing through him. I could smell his sweat, too. It was sour and strong and
reminded me of weak pickle juice.
Dean nodded to Percy. Percy turned back over his shoulder - I could see a place just under the angle of
his jaw where he'd cut himself shaving that day - and said in a low, firm voice: "Roll on one!"
There was a hum, sort of like the sound an old refrigerator makes when it kicks on, and the hanging
lights in the storage room brightened. There were a few low gasps and murmurs from the audience. Del
jerked in the chair, his hands gripping the ends of the oak arms hard enough to turn the knuckles white.
His eyes rolled rapidly from side to side in their sockets, and his dry breathing quickened even more. He
was almost panting now.
"Steady," Brutal murmured. "Steady, Del, you're doing just fine. Hang on, you're doing just fine."Hey you guys! I thought. Come and see what Mr. Jingles can do! And overhead, the thunder banged
again.
Percy stepped grandly around to the front of the electric chain This was his big moment, he was at center
stage, all eyes were on him. All, that was, but for one set. Delacroix saw who it was and looked down at
his lap instead. I would have bet you a dollar to a doughnut that Percy would flub his lines when he
actually had to say them for an audience, but he reeled them off without a hitch, in an eerily calm voice.
"Eduard Delacroix, you have been condemned to die in the electric chair, sentence passed by a jury of
your peers and imposed by a judge of good standing in this state, God save the people of this state. Do
you have anything to say before sentence is carried out?"
Del tried to speak and at first nothing came out but a terrified whisper full of air and vowel-sounds. The
shadow of a contemptuous smile touched the corners of Percy's lips, and I could have cheerfully shot him
right there. Then Del licked his lips and tried again.
" I sorry for what I do," he said. "I give anything to turn back the clock, but no one can. So now - "
Thunder exploded like an airburst mortar shell above us. Del jumped as much as the clamps would allow,
eyes starting wildly out of his wet face. "So now I pay the price. God forgive me." He licked his lips
again, and looked at Brutal. "Don't forget your promise about Mr. Jingles," he said in a lower voice that
was meant just for us.
"We won't, don't worry," I said, and patted Delacroix's clay-cold hand. "He's going to Mouseville - "
"The hell he is' " Percy said, speaking from the corner of his mouth like a yardwise con as he hooked the
restraining belt across Delacroix's chest. "There's no such place. It's a fairy-tale these guys made up to
keep you quiet. Just thought you should know, faggot."
A stricken light in Del's eyes told me that part of him had known ... but would have kept the knowledge
from the rest of him, if allowed. I looked at Percy, dumbfounded and furious, and he looked back at me
levelly, as if to ask what I meant to do about it. And he had me, of course. There was nothing I could do
about it, not in front of the witnesses, not with Delacroix now sitting on the furthest edge of life. There
was nothing to do now but go on with it, finish it.
Percy took the mask from its hook and rolled it down over Del's face, snugging it tight under the little
man's undershot chin so as to stretch the hole in the top. Taking the sponge from the bucket and putting it
in the cap was the next, and it was here that Percy diverged from the routine for the first time: instead of
just bending over and fishing the sponge out, he took the steel cap from the back of the chair, and bent
over with it in his hands. Instead of bringing the sponge to the cap, in other words-which would have
been the natural way to do it - he brought the cap to the sponge. I should have realized something was
wrong, but I was too upset. It was the only execution I ever took part in where I felt totally out of control.
As for Brutal, he never looked at Percy at all, not as Percy bent over the bucket (moving so as to partially
block what he was doing from our view), not as he straightened up and turned to Del with the cap in his
hands and the brown circle of sponge already inside it. Brutal was looking at the cloth which had
replaced Del's face, watching the way the black silk mask drew in, outlining the circle of Del's open
mouth, and then puffed out again with his breath. There were big beads of perspiration on Brutal's
forehead, and at his temples, just below the hairline. I had never seen him sweat at an execution before.
Behind him, Dean looked distracted and W, as if he was fighting not to lose his supper. We all
understood that something was wrong, I know that now. We just couldn't tell what it was. No one knew -not then - about the questions Percy had been asking Jack Van Hay. There were a lot of them, but I
suspect most were just camouflage. What Percy wanted to know about - the only thing Percy wanted to
know about, I believe - was the sponge. The purpose of the sponge. Why it was soaked in brine ... and
what would happen if it was not soaked in brine.
What would happen if the sponge was dry.
Percy jammed the cap down on Del's head. The little man jumped and moaned again, this time louder.
Some of the witnesses stirred uneasily on their folding chairs. Dean took a half-step forward, meaning to
help with the chin-strap, and Percy motioned him curtly to step back. Dean did, hunching a little and
wincing as another blast of thunder shook the storage shed. This time it was followed by the first spatters
of rain across the roof. They sounded hard, like someone flinging handfuls of goobers onto a washboard.
You've heard people say "My blood ran cold" about things, haven't you? Sure. All of us have, but the
only time in all my years that I actually felt it happen to me was on that new and thunderstruck morning
in October of 1932, at about ten seconds past midnight. It wasn't the look of poison triumph on Percy
Wetmore's face as he stepped away from the capped, clamped, and hooded figure sitting there in Old
Sparky; it was what I should have seen and didn't. There was no water running down Del's cheeks from
out of the cap. That was when I finally got it.
"Edward Delacroix," Percy was saying, "electricity shall now be passed through your body until you are
dead, according to state law."
I looked over at Brutal in an agony that made my urinary infection seem like a bumped finger The
sponge is dry! I mouthed at him, but he only shook his head, not understanding, and looked back at the
mask over the Frenchman's face, where the man's last few breaths were pulling the black silk in and then
blousing it out again.
I reached for Percy's elbow and he stepped away from me, giving me a flat look as he did so. It was only
a momentary glance, but it told me everything. Later he would tell his lies and his half-truths, and most
would be believed by the people who mattered, but I knew a different story. Percy was a good student
when he was doing something he cared about, we'd found that out at the rehearsals, and he had listened
carefully when Jack Van Hay explained how the brine-soaked sponge conducted the juice, channelling it,
turning the charge into a kind of electric bullet to the brain. Oh yes, Percy knew exactly what he was
doing. I think I believed him later when he said I didn't know how far it would go, but that doesn't even
count in the good-intentions column, does it? I don't think so. Yet, short of screaming in front of the
assistant warden and all the witnesses for Jack Van Hay not to pull the switch, there was nothing I could
do. Given another five seconds, I think I might have screamed just that, but Percy didn't give me another
five seconds.
"May God have mercy on your soul," he told the panting, terrified figure in the electric chair, then looked
past him at the mesh-covered rectangle where Harry and Jack were standing, Jack with his hand on the
switch marked MABEL'S HAIR DRIER. The doctor was standing to the right of that window, eyes fixed
on the black bag between his feet, as silent and selfeffacing as ever. "Roll on two!"
At first it was the same as always - the humming that was a little louder than the original cycle-up, but
not much, and the mindless forward surge of Del's body as his muscles spasmed.
Then things started going wrong.The humming lost its steadiness and began to waver. It was joined by a crackling sound, like cellophane
being crinkled. I could smell something horrible that I didn't identify as a mixture of burning hair and
organic sponge until I saw blue tendrils of smoke curling out from beneath the edges of the cap. More
smoke was streaming out of the hole in the top of the cap that the wire came in through; it looked like
smoke coming out of the hole in an Indian's teepee.
Delacroix began to jitter and twist in-the chair, his mask-covered face snapping from side to side as if in
some vehement refusal. His legs began to piston up and down in short strokes that were hampered by the
clamps on his ankles. Thunder banged overhead, and now the rain began to pour down harder.
I looked at Dean Stanton; he stared wildly back. There was a muffled pop from under the cap, like a pine
knot exploding in a hot fire, and now I could see smoke coming through the mask, as well, seeping out in
little curls.
I lunged toward the mesh between us and the switch room, but before I could open my mouth, Brutus
Howell seized my elbow. His grip was hard enough to make the nerves in there tingle. He was as white
as tallow but not in a panic - not even close to being in a panic. "Don't you tell Jack to stop," he said in a
low voice. "Whatever you do, don't tell him that. It's too late to stop."
At first, when Del began to scream, the witnesses didn't hear him. The rain on the tin roof had swelled to
a roar, and the thunder was damned near continuous. But those of us on the platform heard him, all right
- choked howls of pain from beneath the smoking mask, sounds an animal caught and mangled in a
hay-baler might make.
The hum from the cap was ragged and wild now, broken by bursts of what sounded like radio static.
Delacroix began to slam back and forth in the chair like a kid doing a tantrum. The platform shook, and
he hit the leather restraining belt almost hard enough to pop it. The current was also twisting him from
side to side, and I heard the crunching snap as his right shoulder either broke or dislocated. It went with a
sound like someone hitting a wooden crate with a sledgehammer. The crotch of his pants, no more than a
blur because of the short pistoning strokes of his legs, darkened. Then he began to squeal, horrible
sounds, high-pitched and ratlike, that were audible even over the rushing downpour.
"What the hell's happening to him?" someone cried.
"Are those clamps going to hold?"
"Christ, the smell! Phew!"
Then, one of the two women: "Is this normal?"
Delacroix snapped forward, dropped back, snapped forward, fell back. Percy was staring at him with
slack-jawed horror. He had expected something, sure, but not this.
The mask burst into flame on Delacroix's face. The smell of cooking hair and sponge was now joined by
the smell of cooking flesh. Brutal grabbed the bucket the sponge had been in - it was empty now, of
course - and charged for the extra-deep janitor's sink in the corner.
"Shouldn't I kill the juice, Paul?" Van Hay called through the mesh. He sounded completely rattled.
"Shouldn't-""No!" I shouted back. Brutal had understood it first, but I hadn't been far behind: we had to finish it.
Whatever else we might do in all the rest of our lives was secondary to that one thing: we had to finish
with Delacroix. "Roll, for Christ's sake! Roll, roll, roll!"
I turned to Brutal, hardly aware of the people talking behind us now, some on their feet, a couple
screaming. "Quit that!" I yelled at Brutal. "No water! No water! Are you nuts?"
Brutal turned toward me, a kind of dazed understanding on his face. Throw water on a man who was
getting the juice. Oh yes. That would be very smart. He looked around, saw the chemical fire
extinguisher hanging on the wall, and got that instead. Good boy.
The mask had peeled away from Delacroix's face enough to reveal features that had gone blacker than
John Coffey's. His eyes, now nothing but misshapen globs of white, filmy jelly, had been blown out of
their sockets and lay on his cheeks. His eyelashes were gone, and as I looked, the lids themselves caught
fire and began to burn. Smoke puffed from the open V of his shirt. And still the humming of the
electricity went on and on, filling my head, vibrating in there. I think it's the sound mad people must
hear, that or something like it.
Dean started forward, thinking in some dazed way that he could beat the fire out of Del's shirt with his
hands, and I yanked him away almost hard enough to pull him off his feet. Touching Delacroix at that
point would have been like Brer Rabbit punching into the Tar-Baby. An electrified Tar-Baby, in this
case.
I still didn't turn around to see what was going on behind us, but it sounded like pandemonium, chairs
falling over, people bellowing, a woman crying "Stop it, stop it, oh can't you see he's had enough?" at the
top of her lungs. Curtis Anderson grabbed my shoulder and asked what was happening, for Christ's sake,
what was happening, and why didn't I order jack to shut down?
"Because I can't," I said. "We've gone too far to turn back, can't you see that? It'll be over in a few more
seconds, anyway."
But it was at least two minutes before it was over, the longest two minutes of my whole life, and through
most of it I think Delacroix was conscious. He screamed and jittered and rocked from side to side. Smoke
poured from his nostrils and from a mouth that had gone the purple-black of ripe plums. Smoke drifted
up from his tongue the way smoke rises from a hot griddle. All the buttons on his shirt either burst or
melted. His undershirt did not quite catch fire, but it charred and smoke poured through it and we could
smell his chest-hair roasting. Behind us, people were heading for the door like cattle in a stampede. They
couldn't get out through it, of course - we were in a damn prison, after all - so they simply clustered
around it while Delacroix fried (Now I'm fryin, Old Toot had said when we were rehearsing for Arlen
Bitterbuck, I'm a done tom turkey) and the thunder rolled and the rain ran down out of the sky in a perfect
fury.
At some point I thought of the doc and looked around for him. He was still there, but crumpled on the
floor beside his black bag. He'd fainted.
Brutal came up and stood beside me, holding the fire extinguisher.
"Not yet," I said.
"I know."We looked around for Percy and saw him standing almost behind Sparky now, frozen, eyes huge, one
knuckle crammed into his mouth.
Then, at last, Delacroix slumped back in the chair, his bulging, misshapen face lying over on one
shoulder. He was still jittering, but we'd seen this before; it was the current running through him. The cap
had come askew on his head, but when we took it off a little later, most of his scalp and his remaining
fringe of hair came with it, bonded to the metal as if by some powerful adhesive.
"Kill it!" I called to Jack when thirty seconds had gone by with nothing but electric jitters coming from
the smoking, man-shaped lump of charcoal lolling in the electric chair. The hum died immediately, and I
nodded to Brutal.
He turned and slammed the fire extinguisher into Percy's arms so hard that Percy staggered backward and
almost fell off the platform. "You do it," Brutal said. "You're running the show, after all, ain't you?"
Percy gave him a look that was both sick and murderous, then armed the extinguisher, pumped it, cocked
it, and shot a huge cloud of white foam over the man in the chair. I saw Del's foot twitch once as the
spray hit his face and thought Oh no, we might have to go again, but there was only that single twitch.
Anderson had turned around and was bawling at the panicky witnesses, telling them everything was all
right, everything was under control, just a powersurge from the electrical storm, nothing to worry about.
Next thing, he'd be telling them that what they smelled - a devil's mixture of burned hair, fried meat, and
fresh-baked shit - was Chanel No. 5.
"Get doc's stethoscope," I told Dean as the extinguisher ran dry. Delacroix was coated with white now,
and the worst of the stench was being overlaid by a thin and bitter chemical smell.
"Doc ... should I .. ."
"Never mind doc, just get his stethoscope," I said. "Let's get this over ... get him out of here."
Dean nodded. Over and out of here were two concepts that appealed to him just then. They appealed to
both of us. He went over to doc's bag and began rummaging in it. Doc was beginning to move again, so
at least he hadn't had a stroke or a heart-storm. That was good. But the way Brutal was looking at Percy
wasn't.
"Get down in the tunnel and wait by the gurney," I said.
Percy swallowed. "Paul, listen. I didn't know---"
"Shut up. Get down in the tunnel and wait by the gurney. Now."
He swallowed, grimaced as if it hurt, and then walked toward the door which led to the stairs and the
tunnel. He carried the empty fire extinguisher in his arms, as if it were a baby Dean passed him, coming
back to me with the stethoscope. I snatched it and set the earpieces. I'd done this before, in the army, and
it's sort of like riding a bike - you don't forget.
I wiped at the foam on Delacroix's chest, then had to gag back vomit as a large, hot section of his skin
simply slid away from the flesh beneath, the way the skin will slide off a ... well, you know. A done tom
turkey."Oh my God"' a voice I didn't recognize almost sobbed behind me. "Is it always this way? Why didn't
somebody tell me? I never would have come!"
Too late now, friend, I thought. "Get that man out of here," I said to Dean or Brutal or whoever might be
listening - I said it when I was sure I could speak without puking into Delacroix's smoking lap. "Get them
all back by the door."
I steeled myself as best I could, then put the disc of the stethoscope on the red-black patch of raw flesh
I'd made on Del's chest. I listened, praying I would hear nothing, and that's just what I did hear.
"He's dead," I told Brutal.
"Thank Christ."
"Yes. Thank Christ. You and Dean get the stretcher. Let's unbuckle him and get him out of here, fast."
5.
We got his body down the twelve stairs and onto the gurney all right. My nightmare was that his cooked
flesh might slough right off his bones as we lugged him - it was Old Toot's done tom turkey that had
gotten into my head - but of course that didn't happen.
Curtis Anderson was upstairs soothing the spectators -trying to, anyway - and that was good for Brutal,
because Anderson wasn't there to see when Brutal took a step toward the head of the gurney and pulled
his arm back to slug Percy, who was standing there looking stunned. I caught his arm, and that was good
for both of them. It was good for Percy because Brutal meant to deliver a blow of near-decapitory force,
and good for Brutal because he would have lost his job if the blow had connected, and maybe ended up
in prison himself.
"No," I said.
"What do you mean, no?" he asked me furiously. "How can you say no? You saw what he did! What are
you telling me? That you're still going to let his connections protect him? After what he did?"
Brutal stared at me, mouth agape, eyes so angry they were watering.
"Listen to me, Brutus - you take a poke at him, and most likely we all go. You, me, Dean, Harry, maybe
even Jack Van Hay. Everyone else moves a rung or two up the ladder, starting with Bill Dodge, and the
Prison Commission hires three or four Breadline Barneys to fill the spots at the bottom. Maybe you can
live with that, but-" I cocked my thumb at Dean, who was staring down the dripping, brick-lined tunnel.
He was holding his specs in one hand, and looked almost as dazed as Percy. "But what about Dean? He's
got two kids, one in high school and one just about to go."
"So what's it come down to?" Brutal asked. "We let him get away with it?"
"I didn't know the sponge was supposed to be wet," Percy said in a faint, mechanical voice. This was the
story he had rehearsed beforehand, of course, when he was expecting a painful prank instead of the
cataclysm we had just witnessed. "It was never wet when we rehearsed.""Aw, you sucker-" Brutal began, and started for Percy. I grabbed him again and yanked him back.
Footsteps clacked on the steps. I looked up, desperately afraid of seeing Curtis Anderson, but it wasHarry Terwilliger. His cheeks were paper-white and his lips were purplish, as if he'd been eating
blackberry cobbler.
I switched my attention back to Brutal. "For God's sake, Brutal, Delacroix's dead, nothing can change
that, and Percy's not worth it." Was the plan, or the beginnings of it, in my head even then? I've
wondered about that since, let me tell you. I've wondered over the course of a lot of years, and have
never been able to come up with a satisfactory answer. I suppose it doesn't matter much. A lot of things
don't matter, but it doesn't keep a man from wondering about them, I've noticed.
"You guys talk about me like I was a chump," Percy said. He still sounded dazed and winded - as if
someone had punched him deep in the gut - but he was coming back a little.
"You are a chump, Percy," I said.
"Hey, you can't-"
I controlled my own urge to hit him only with the greatest effort. Water dripped hollowly from the bricks
down in the tunnel; our shadows danced huge and misshapen on the walls, like shadows in that Poe story
about the big ape in the Rue Morgue. Thunder bashed, but down here it was muffled.
"I only want to hear one thing from you, Percy, and that's you repeating your promise to put in for Briar
Ridge tomorrow."
"Don't worry about that," he said sullenly. He looked at the sheeted figure on the gurney, looked away,
flicked his eyes up toward my face for a moment, then looked away again."That would be for the best," Harry said. "Otherwise, you might get to know Wild Bill Wharton a whole
lot better than you want to." A slight pause. "We could see to it."
Percy was afraid of us, and he was probably afraid of what we might do if he was still around when we
found out he'd been talking to Jack Van Hay about what the sponge was for and why we always soaked it
in brine, but Harry's mention of Wharton woke real terror in his eyes. I could see him remembering how
Wharton had held him, ruffling his hair and crooning to him.
"You wouldn't dare," Percy whispered.
"Yes I would," Harry replied calmly. "And do you know what? I'd get away with it. Because you've
already shown yourself to be careless as hell around the prisoners. Incompetent, too."
Percy's fists bunched and his cheeks colored in a thin pink. "I am not-""Sure you are," Dean said, joining us. We formed a rough semicircle around Percy at the foot of the
stairs, and even a retreat up the tunnel was blocked; the gurney was behind him, with its load of smoking
flesh hidden under an old sheet. "You just burned Delacroix alive. If that ain't incompetent, what is?"
Percy's eyes flickered. He had been planning to cover himself by pleading ignorance, and now he saw he
was hoist by his own petard. I don't know what he might have said next, because Curtis Anderson came
lunging down the stairs just then.
We heard him and drew back from Percy a little, so as not to look quite so threatening.
"What in the blue fuck was that all about? Anderson roared. "Jesus Christ, there's puke all over the floorup there! And the smell! I got Magnusson and Old Toot-Toot to open both doors, but that smell won't
come out for five damn years, that's what I'm betting. And that asshole Wharton is singing about it! I can
hear him!"
"Can he carry a tune, Curt?" Brutal asked. You know how you can bum off illuminating gas with a single
spark and not be hurt if you do it before the concentration gets too heavy? This was like that. We took an
instant to gape at Brutus, and then we were all howling. Our high, hysterical laughter flapped up and
down the gloomy tunnel like bats. Our shadows bobbed and flickered on the walls. Near the end, even
Percy joined in. At last it died, and in its aftermath we all felt a little better. Felt sane again.
"Okay, boys," Anderson said, mopping at his teary eyes with his handkerchief and still snorting out an
occasional hiccup of laughter, "what the hell happened?"
"An execution," Brutal said. I think his even tone surprised Anderson, but it didn't surprise me, at least
not much; Brutal had always been good at turning down his dials in a hurry. "A successful one."
"How in the name of Christ can you call a directcurrent abortion like that a success? We've got witnesses
that won't sleep for a month! Hell, that fat old broad probably won't sleep for a year!"
Brutal pointed at the gurney, and the shape under the sheet. "He's dead, ain't he? As for your witnesses,
most of them will be telling their friends tomorrow night that it was poetic justice - Del there burned a
bunch of people alive, so we turned around and burned him alive. Except they won't say it was us. They'll
say it was the will of God, working through us. Maybe there's even some truth to that. And you want to
know the best part? The absolute cat's pajamas? Most of their friends will wish they'd been here to see
it." He gave Percy a look both distasteful and sardonic as he said this last.
"And if their feathers are a little ruffled, so what?" Harry asked. "They volunteered for the damn job,
nobody drafted them."
"I didn't know the sponge was supposed to be wet," Percy said in his robot's voice. "It's never wet in
rehearsal."
Dean looked at him with utter disgust. "How many years did you spend pissing on the toilet seat before
someone told you to put it up before you start?" he snarled.
Percy opened his mouth to reply, but I told him to shut up. For a wonder, he did. I turned to Anderson.
"Percy fucked up, Curtis - that's what happened, pure and simple." I turned toward Percy, daring him to
contradict me. He didn't, maybe because he read my eyes: better that Anderson hear stupid mistake than
on purpose. And besides, whatever was said down here in the tunnel didn't matter. What mattered, what
always matters to the Percy Wetmores of the world, is what gets written down or overheard by the big
bugs - the people who matter. What matters to the Percys of the world is how it plays in the newspapers.
Anderson looked at the five of us uncertainly. He even looked at Del, but Del wasn't talking. "I guess it
could be worse," Anderson said.
"That's right," I agreed. "He could still be alive."
Curtis blinked - that possibility seemed not to have crossed his mind. "I want a complete report about this
on my desk tomorrow," he said. "And none of you are going to talk to Warden Moores about it until I'vehad my chance. Are you?"
We shook our heads vehemently. If Curtis Anderson wanted to tell the warden, why, that was fine by us.
"If none of those asshole scribblers put it in their papers -"
"They won't," I said. "If they tried, their editors'd kill it. Too gruesome for a family audience. But they
won't even try - they were all vets tonight. Sometimes things go wrong, that's all. They know it as well as
we do."
Anderson considered a moment longer, then nodded. He turned his attention to Percy, an expression of
disgust on his usually pleasant face. "You're a little asshole," he said, "and I don't like you a bit." He
nodded at Percy's look of flabbergasted surprise. "If you tell any of your candy-ass friends I said that, I'll
deny it until Aunt Rhody's old gray goose comes back to life, and these men will back me up. You've got
a problem, son."
He turned and started up the stairs. I let him get four steps and then said: "Curtis?"
He turned back, eyebrows raised, saying nothing.
"You don't want to worry too much about Percy," I said. "He's moving on to Briar Ridge soon. Bigger
and better things. Isn't that right, Percy?"
"As soon as his transfer comes through," Brutal added.
"And until it comes, he's going to call in sick every night," Dean put in.
That roused Percy, who hadn't been working at the prison long enough to have accumulated any paid
sick-time. He looked at Dean with bright distaste. "Don't you wish," he said.
6.
We were back on the block by one-fifteen or so (except for Percy, who had been ordered to clean up the
storage room and was sulking his way through the job), me with a report to write. I decided to do it at the
duty desk; if I sat in my more comfortable office chair, I'd likely doze off. That probably sounds peculiar
to you, given what had happened only an hour before' but I felt as if I'd lived three lifetimes since eleven
o'clock the previous night, all of them without sleep.
John Coffey was standing at his cell door, tears streaming from his strange, distant eyes - it was like
watching blood run out of some unhealable but strangely painless wound. Closer to the desk, Wharton
was sitting on his bunk, rocking from side to side, and singing a song apparently of his own invention,
and not quite nonsense. As well as I can remember, it went something like this:
"Bar-be-cue! Me and you!
Stinky, pinky, phew-phew-phew!
It wasn't Billy or Philadelphia Philly, it wasn't Jackie or Roy! It was a warm little number, a hot
cucumber, by the name of Delacroix!"
"Shut up, you jerk," I said.Wharton grinned, showing his mouthful of dingy teeth. He wasn't dying, at least not yet; he was up,
happy, practically tap-dancing. "Come on in here and make me, why don't you?" he said happily, and
then began another verse of "The Barbecue Song," making up words not quite at random. There was
something going on in there, all right. A kind of green and stinking intelligence that was, in its own way,
almost brilliant.
I went down to John Coffey. He wiped away his tears with the heels of his hands. His eyes were red and
sore-looking, and it came to me that he was exhausted, too. Why he should have been, a man who
trudged around the exercise yard maybe two hours a day and either sat or laid down in his cell the rest of
the time, I didn't know, but I didn't doubt what I was seeing. It was too clear.
"Poor Del," he said in a low, hoarse voice. "Poor old Del."
"Yes," I said. "Poor old Del. John, are you okay?"
"He's out of it," Coffey said. "Del's out of it. Isn't he, boss?"
"Yes. Answer my question, John. Are you okay?"
"Del's out of it, he's the lucky one. No matter how it happened, he's the lucky one."
I thought Delacroix might have given him an argument on that, but didn't say so. I glanced around
Coffey's cell, instead. "Where's Mr. Jingles?"
"Ran down there." He pointed through the bars, down the hall to the restraint-room door.
I nodded. "Well, he'll be back."
But he wasn't; Mr. Jingles's days on the Green Mile were over. The only trace of him we ever happened
on was what Brutal found that winter: a few brightly colored splinters of wood, and a smell of
peppermint candy wafting out of a hole in a beam.
I meant to walk away then, but I didn't. I looked at John Coffey, and he back at me as if he knew
everything I was thinking. I told myself to get moving, to just call it a night and get moving, back to the
duty desk and my report. Instead I said his name: "John Coffey."
"Yes, boss," he said at once.
Sometimes a man is cursed with needing to know a thing, and that was how it was with me right then. I
dropped down on one knee and began taking off one of my shoes.
7.
The rain had quit by the time I got home, and a late grin of moon had appeared over the ridges to the
north. My sleepiness seemed to have gone with the clouds. I was wide awake, and I could smell
Delacroix on me. I thought I might smell him on my skin - barbecue, me and you, stinky, pinky,
phew-phew-phew - for a long time to come.
Janice was waiting up, as she always did on execution nights. I meant not to tell her the story, saw no
sense in harrowing her with it, but she got a clear look at my face as I came in the kitchen door and
would have it all. So I sat down, took her warm hands in my cold ones (the heater in my old Ford barely
worked, and the weather had turned a hundred and eighty degrees since the storm), and told her what shethought she wanted to hear. About halfway through I broke down crying, which I hadn't expected. I was
a little ashamed, but only a little; it was her, you see, and she never taxed me with the times that I slipped
from the way I thought a man should be ... the way I thought I should be, at any rate. A man with a good
wife is the luckiest of God's creatures, and one without must be among the most miserable, I think, the
only true blessing of their lives that they don't know how poorly off they are. I cried, and she held my
head against her breast, and when my own storm passed, I felt better ... a little, anyway. And I believe
that was when I had the first conscious sight of my idea. Not the shoe; I don't mean that. The shoe was
related, but different. All my real idea was right then, however, was an odd realization: that John Coffey
and Melinda Moores, different as they might have been in size and sex and skin color, had exactly the
same eyes: woeful, sad, and distant. Dying eyes.
"Come to bed," my wife said at last. "Come to bed with me, Paul."
So I did, and we made love, and when it was over she went to sleep. As I lay there watching the moon
grin and listening to the walls tick - they were at last pulling in, exchanging summer for fall - I thought
about John Coffey saying he had helped it. I helped Del's mouse. I helped Mr. Jingles. He's a circus
mouse. Sure. And maybe, I thought, we were all circus mice, running around with only the dimmest
awareness that God and all His heavenly host were watching us in our Bakelite houses through our
ivy-glass windows.
I slept a little as the day began to lighten - two hours, I guess, maybe three; and I slept the way I always
sleep these days here in Georgia Pines and hardly ever did then, in thin little licks. What I went to sleep
thinking about was the churches youth. The names changed, depending on the whims of my mother and
her sisters, but they were all really the same, all The First Backwoods Church of Praise Jesus, The Lord
Is Mighty. In the shadow of those blunt, square steeples, the concept of atonement came up as regularly
as the toll of the bell which called the faithful to worship. Only God could forgive sins, could and did,
washing them away in the agonal blood of His crucified Son, but that did not change the responsibility of
His children to atone for those sins (and even their simple errors of judgement) whenever possible.
Atonement was powerful; it was the lock on the door you closed against the past.
I fell asleep thinking of piney-woods atonement, and Eduard Delacroix on fire as he rode the lightning,
and Melinda Moores, and my big boy with the endlessly weeping eyes. These thoughts twisted their way
into a dream. In it, John Coffey was sitting on a riverbank and bawling his inarticulate mooncalf's grief
up at the early-summer sky while on the other bank a freight-train stormed endlessly toward a rusty
trestle spanning the Trapingus. In the crook of each arm the black man held the body of a naked,
blonde-haired girlchild. His fists, huge brown rocks at the ends of those arms' were closed. All around
him crickets chirred and noseeums flocked; the day hummed with heat. In my dream I went to him, knelt
before him, and took his hands. His fists relaxed and gave up their secrets. In one was a spool colored
green and red and yellow. In the other was a prison guard's shoe.
"I couldn't help it," John Coffey said. "I tried to take it back, but it was too late."
And this time, in my dream, I understood him.
8.
At nine o'clock the next morning, while I was having a third cup of coffee in the kitchen (my wife said
nothing, but I could see disapproval large on her face when she brought it to me), the telephone rang. I
went into the parlor to take it, and Central told someone that their party was holding the line. She thentold me to have a birdlarky day and rang off ... presumably. With Central, you could never quite tell for
sure.
Hal Moores's voice shocked me. Wavery and hoarse, it sounded like the voice of an octogenarian. It
occurred to me that it was good that things had gone all right with Curtis Anderson in the tunnel last
night, good that he felt about the same as we did about Percy, because this man I was talking to would
very likely never work another day at Cold Mountain.
"Paul, I understand there was trouble last night. I also understand that our friend Mr. Wetmore war,
involved."
"A spot of trouble," I admitted, holding the receiver tight to my ear and leaning in toward the horn, "but
the job got done. That's the important thing."
"Yes. Of course."
"Can I ask who told you?" So I can tie a can to his tail? I didn't add."You can ask, but since it's really none of your beeswax, I think I'll keep my mouth shut on that score.
But when I called my office to see if there were any messages or urgent business, I was told an
interesting thing."
"Oh?"
"Yes. Seems a transferral application landed in my basket. Percy Wetmore wants to go to Briar Ridge as
soon as possible. Must have filled out the application even before last night's shift was over, wouldn't you
think?"
"It sounds that way," I agreed.
"Ordinarily I'd let Curtis handle it, but considering the ... atmosphere on E Block just lately, I asked
Hannah to run it over to me personally on her lunch hour. She has graciously agreed to do so. I'll approve
it and see it's forwarded on to the state capital this afternoon. I expect you'll get a look at Percy's backside
going out the door in no more than a month. Maybe less."
He expected me to be pleased with this news, and had a right to expect it. He had taken time out from
tending his wife to expedite a matter that might otherwise have taken upwards of half a year, even with
Percy's vaunted connections. Nevertheless, my heart sank. A month! But maybe it didn't matter much,
one way or the other. It removed a perfectly natural desire to wait and put off a risky endeavor, and what
I was now thinking about would be very risky indeed. Sometimes, when that's the case, it's better to jump
before you can lose your nerve. If we were going to have to deal with Percy in any case (always
assuming I could get the others to go along with my insanity - always assuming there was a we, in other
words), it might as well be tonight.
"Paul? Are you there?" His voice lowered a little, as if he thought he was now talking to himself. "Damn,
I think I lost the connection."
"No, I'm here, Hal. That's great news."
"Yes," he agreed, and I was again struck by how old he sounded. How papery, somehow. "Oh, I know
what you're thinking."No, you don't, Warden, I thought. Never in a million years could you know what I'm thinking.
"You're thinking that our young friend will still be around for the Coffey execution. That's probably true
- Coffey will go well before Thanksgiving, I imagine - but you can put him back in the switch room. No
one will object. Including him, I should think."
"I'll do that," I said. "Hal, how's Melinda?"
There was a long pause so long I might have thought I'd lost him, except for the sound of his breathing.
When he spoke this time, it was in a much lower tone of voice. "She's sinking," he said.
Sinking. That chilly word the old-timers used not to describe a person who was dying, exactly, but one
who had begun to uncouple from living.
"The headaches seem a little better ... for now, anyway ... but she can't walk without help, she can't pick
things up, she loses control of her water while she sleeps . . ." There was another pause, and then, in an
even lower voice, Hal said something that sounded like "She wears."
"Wears what, Hal?" I asked, frowning. My wife had come into the parlor doorway. She stood there
wiping her hands on a dishtowel and looking at me.
"No," he said in a voice that seemed to waver between anger and tears. "She swears."
"Oh." I still didn't know what he meant, but had no intention of pursuing it. I didn't have to; he did it for
me.
"She'll be all right, perfectly normal, talking about her flower-garden or a dress she saw in the catalogue,
or maybe about how she heard Roosevelt on the radio and how wonderful he sounds, and then, all at
once, she'll start to say the most awful things, the most awful ... words. She doesn't raise her voice. It
would almost be better if she did, I think, because then ... you see, then . . ."
"She wouldn't sound so much like herself."
"That's it," he said gratefully. "But to hear her saying those awful gutter-language things in her sweet
voice ... pardon me, Paul." His voice trailed away and I heard him noisily clearing his throat. Then he
came back, sounding a little stronger but just as distressed. "She wants to have Pastor Donaldson over,
and I know he's a comfort to her, but how can I ask him? Suppose that he's sitting there, reading
Scripture with her, and she calls him a foul name? She could; she called me one last night. She said,
'Hand me that Liberty magazine, you cocksucker, would you?' Paul, where could she have ever heard
such language? How could she know those words?"
"I don't know. Hal, are you going to be home this evening?"
When he was well and in charge of himself, not distracted by worry or grief, Hal Moores had a cutting
and sarcastic facet to his personality; his subordinates feared that side of him even more than his anger or
his contempt, I think. His sarcasm, usually impatient and often harsh, could sting like acid. A little of that
now splashed on me. It was unexpected, but on the whole I was glad to hear it. All the fight hadn't gone
out of him after all, it seemed.
"No," he said, "I'm taking Melinda out squaredancing. We're going to do-si-do, allemand left, and thentell the fiddler he's a rooster-dick motherfucker."
I clapped my hand over my mouth to keep from laughing. Mercifully, it was an urge that passed in a
hurry.
"I'm sorry," he said. "I haven't been getting much sleep lately. It's made me grouchy. Of course we're
going to be home. Why do you ask?"
"It doesn't matter, I guess," I said.
"You weren't thinking of coming by, were you?
Because if you were on last night, you'll be on tonight. Unless you've switched with somebody?"
"No, I haven't switched," I said. "I'm on tonight."
"It wouldn't be a good idea, anyway. Not the way she is right now."
"Maybe not. Thanks for your news."
"You're welcome. Pray for my Melinda, Paul."
I said I would, thinking that I might do quite a bit more than pray. God helps those who help themselves,
as they say in The Church of Praise Jesus, The Lord Is Mighty. I hung up and looked at Janice.
"How's Melly?" she asked.
"Not good." I told her what Hal had told me, including the part about the swearing, although I left out
cocksucker and rooster-dick motherfucker. I finished with Hal's word, sinking, and Jan nodded sadly.
Then she took a closer look at me.
"What are you thinking about? You're thinking about something, probably no good. It's in your face."
Lying was out of the question; it wasn't the way we were with each other. I just told her it was best she
not know, at least for the time being.
"Is it ... could it get you in trouble?" She didn't sound particularly alarmed at the idea - more interested
than anything - which is one of the things I have always loved about her.
"Maybe," I said.
"Is it a good thing?"
"Maybe," I repeated. I was standing there, still turning the phone's crank idly with one finger, while I
held down the connecting points with a finger of my other hand.
"Would you like me to leave you alone while you use the telephone?" she asked. "Be a good little woman
and butt out? Do some dishes? Knit some booties?"
I nodded. "That's not the way I'd put it, but-"
"Are we having extras for lunch, Paul?"
"I hope so," I said.9.
I got Brutal and Dean right away, because both of them were on the exchange. Harry wasn't, not then, at
least, but I had the number of his closest neighbor who was. Harry called me back about twenty minutes
later, highly embarrassed at having to reverse the charges and sputtering promises to "pay his share"
when our next bill came. I told him we'd count those chickens when they hatched; in the meantime, could
he come over to my place for lunch? Brutal and Dean would be here, and Janice had promised to put out
some of her famous slaw ... not to mention her even more famous apple pie.
"Lunch just for the hell of it?" Harry sounded skeptical.
I admitted I had something I wanted to talk to them about, but it was best not gone into, even lightly,
over the phone. Harry agreed to come. I dropped the receiver onto the prongs, went to the window, and
looked out thoughtfully. Although we'd had the late shift, I hadn't wakened either Brutal or Dean, and
Harry hadn't sounded like a fellow freshly turned out of dreamland, either. It seemed that I wasn't the
only one having problems with what had happened last night, and considering the craziness I had in
mind, that was probably good.
Brutal, who lived closest to me, arrived at quarter past eleven. Dean showed up fifteen minutes later, and
Harry - already dressed for work - about fifteen minutes after Dean. Janice served us cold beef
sandwiches, slaw, and iced tea in the kitchen. Only a day before, we would have had it out on the side
porch and been glad of a breeze, but the temperature had dropped a good fifteen degrees since the
thunderstorm, and a keen-edged wind was snuffling down from the ridges."You're welcome to sit down with us," I told my wife.
She shook her head. "I don't think I want to know what you're up to - I'll worry less if I'm in the dark. I'll
have a bite in the parlor. I'm visiting with Miss Jane Austen this week, and she's very good company."
"Who's Jane Austen?" Harry asked when she had left. "Your side or Janices's, Paul? A cousin? Is she
pretty?"
"She's a writer, you nit," Brutal told him. "Been dead practically since Betsy Ross basted the stars on the
first flag."
"Oh." Harry looked embarrassed. "I'm not much of a reader. Radio manuals, mostly."
"What's on your mind, Paul?" Dean asked.
"John Coffey and Mr. Jingles, to start with." They looked surprised, which I had expected - they'd been
thinking I wanted to discuss either Delacroix or Percy. Maybe both. I looked at Dean and Harry "The
thing with Mr. Jingles - what Coffey did - happened pretty fast. I don't know if you got there in time to
see how broken up the mouse was or not."
Dean shook his head. "I saw the blood on the floor, though."
I turned to Brutal.
"That son of a bitch Percy crushed it," he said simply. "It should have died, but it didn't. Coffey did
something to it. Healed it somehow. I know how that sounds, but I saw it with my own eyes."I said: "He healed me, as well, and I didn't just see it, I felt it." I told them about my urinary infection -
how it had come back, how bad it had been (I pointed through the window at the woodpile I'd had to hold
onto the morning the pain drove me to my knees), and how it had gone away completely after Coffey
touched me. And stayed away.
It didn't take long to tell. When I was done, they sat and thought about it awhile, chewing on their
sandwiches as they did. Then Dean said, "Black things came out of his mouth. Like bugs."
"That's right," Harry agreed. "They were black to start with, anyway. Then they turned white and
disappeared." He looked around, considering. "It's like I damned near forgot the whole thing until you
brought it up, Paul. Ain't that funny?"
"Nothing funny or strange about it," Brutal said. "I think that's what people most always do with the stuff
they can't make out - just forget it. Doesn't do a person much good to remember stuff that doesn't make
any sense. What about it, Paul? Were there bugs when he fixed you?"
"Yes. I think they're the sickness ... the pain ... the hurt. He takes it in, then lets it out into the open air
again."
"Where it dies," Harry said.
I shrugged. I didn't know if it died or not, wasn't sure it even mattered.
"Did he suck it out of you?" Brutal asked. "He looked like he was sucking it right out of the mouse. The
hurt. The ... you know. The death."
"No," I said. "He just touched me. And I felt it. A kind of jolt, like electricity only not painful. But I
wasn't dying, only hurting."
Brutal nodded. "The touch and the breath. Just like you hear those backwoods gospel-shouters going on
about."
"Praise Jesus, the Lord is mighty," I said.
"I dunno if Jesus comes into it," Brutal said, "but it seems to me like John Coffey is one mighty man."
"All right," Dean said. "If you say all this happened, I guess I believe it. God works in mysterious ways
His wonders to perform. But what's it got to do with us?"
Well, that was the big question, wasn't it? I took in a deep breath and told them what I wanted to do.
They listened, dumbfounded. Even Brutal, who liked to read those magazines with the stories about little
green men from space, looked dumbfounded. There was a longer silence when I finished this time, and
no one chewing any sandwiches.
At last, in a gentle and reasonable voice, Brutus Howell said: "We'd lose our jobs if we were caught,
Paul, and we'd be very goddam lucky if that was all that happened. We'd probably end up over in A
Block as guests of the state, making wallets and showering in pairs."
"Yes," I said. "That could happen."
"I can understand how you feel, a little," he went on. "You know Moores better than us - he's your friend
as well as the big boss - and I know you think a lot of his wife...""She's the sweetest woman you could ever hope to meet," I said, "and she means the world to him."
"But we don't know her the way you and Janice do," Brutal said. "Do we, Paul?"
"You'd like her if you did," I said. "At least, you'd like her if you'd met her before this thing got its claws
into her. She does a lot of community things, she's a good friend, and she's religious. More than that,
she's funny. Used to be, anyway. She could tell you things that'd make you laugh until the tears rolled
down your cheeks. But none of those things are the reason I want to help save her, if she can be saved.
What's happening to her is an offense, goddammit, an offense. To the eyes and the ears and the heart."
"Very noble, but I doubt like hell if that's what put this bee in your bonnet," Brutal said. "I think it's what
happened to Del. You want to balance it off somehow."
And he was right. Of course he was. I knew Melinda Moores better than the others did, but maybe not, in
the end, well enough to ask them to risk their jobs for her - and possibly their freedom, as well. Or my
own job and freedom, for that matter. I had two children, and the last thing on God's earth that I wanted
my wife to have to do was to write them the news that their father was going on trial for... well, what
would it be? I didn't know for sure. Aiding and abetting an escape attempt seemed the most likely.
But the death of Eduard Delacroix had been the ugliest, foulest thing I had ever seen in my life - not just
my working life but my whole, entire life - and I had been a party to it. We had all been a party to it,
because we had allowed Percy Wetmore to stay even after we knew he was horribly unfit to work in a
place like E Block. We had played the game. Even Warden Moores had been a party to it. "His nuts are
going to cook whether Wetmore's on the team or not," he had said, and maybe that was well enough,
considering what the little Frenchman had done, but in the end Percy had done a lot more than cook Del's
nuts; he had blown the little man's eyeballs right out of their sockets and set his damned face on fire. And
why? Because Del was a murderer half a dozen times over? No. Because Percy had wet his pants and the
little Cajun had had the temerity to laugh at him. We'd been part of a monstrous act, and Percy was going
to get away with it. Off to Briar Ridge he would go, happy as a clam at high tide, and there he would
have a whole asylum filled with lunatics to practice his cruelties upon. There was nothing we could do
about that, but perhaps it was not too late to wash some of the muck off our own hands.
"In my church they call it atonement instead of balancing," I said, "but I guess it comes to the same
thing."
"Do you really think Coffey could save her?" Dean asked in a soft, awed voice. '"Just ... what? ... suck
that brain tumor out of her head? Like it was a ... a peach-pit?"
"I think he could. It's not for sure, of course, but after what he did to me ... and to Mr. Jingles . . ."
"That mouse was seriously busted up, all right," Brutal said.
"But would he do it?" Harry mused. "Would he?"
"If he can, he will," I said.
"Why? Coffey doesn't even know her!"
"Because it's what he does. It's what God made him for."
Brutal made a show of looking around, reminding us all that someone was missing. "What about Percy?You think he's just gonna let this go down?" he asked, and so I told them what I had in mind for Percy
By the time I finished, Harry and Dean were looking at me in amazement, and a reluctant grin of
admiration had dawned on Brutal's face.
"Pretty audacious, Brother Paul!" he said. "Fair takes my breath away!""But wouldn't it be the bee's knees!" Dean almost whispered, then laughed aloud and clapped his hands
like a child. "I mean, voh-doh-dee-oh-doh and twenty-three-skidoo!" You want to remember that Dean
had a special interest in the part of my plan that involved Percy - Percy - Percy could have gotten Dean
killed, after all, freezing up the way he had.
"Yeah, but what about after?" Harry said. He sounded gloomy, but his eyes gave him away; they were
sparkling, the eyes of a man who wants to be convinced. "What then?"
"They say dead men tell no tales," Brutal rumbled, and I took a quick look at him to make sure he was
joking.
"I think he'll keep his mouth shut," I said.
"Really?" Dean looked skeptical. He took off his glasses and began to polish them. "Convince me."
"First, he won't know what really happened - he's going to judge us by himself and think it was just a
prank. Second - and more important - he'll be afraid to say anything. That's what I'm really counting on.
We tell him that if he starts writing letters and making phone calls, we start writing letters and making
phone calls."
"About the execution," Harry said.
"And about the way he froze when Wharton attacked Dean," Brutal said. "I think people finding out
about that is what Percy Wetmore's really afraid of." He nodded slowly and thoughtfully. "It could work.
But Paul... wouldn't it make more sense to bring Mrs. Moores to Coffey than Coffey to Mrs. Moores? We
could take care of Percy pretty much the way you laid it out, then bring her in through the tunnel instead
of taking Coffey out that way."
I shook my head. "Never happen. Not in a million years."
"Because of Warden Moores?"
"Mat's right. He's so hardheaded he makes old Doubting Thomas look like Joan of Arc. If we bring
Coffey to his house, I think we can surprise him into at least letting Coffey make the try. Otherwise..."
"What were you thinking about using for a vehicle?" Brutal asked.
"My first thought was the stagecoach," I said, "but we'd never get it out of the yard without being
noticed, and everyone within a twenty-mile radius knows what it looks like, anyway. I guess maybe we
can use my Ford."
"Guess again," Dean said, popping his specs back onto his nose. "You couldn't get John Coffey into your
car if you stripped him naked, covered him with lard, and used a shoehorn. You're so used to looking at
him that you've forgotten how big he is."
I had no reply to that. Most of my attention that morning had been focused on the problem of Percy - andthe lesser but not inconsiderable problem of Wild Bill Wharton. Now I realized that transportation wasn'tgoing to be as simple as I had hoped.
Harry Terwilliger picked up the remains of his second sandwich, looked at it for a second, then put it
down again. "If we was to actually do this crazy thing," he said, "I guess we could use my pickup truck.
Sit him in the back of that. Wouldn't be nobody much on the roads at that hour. We're talking about well
after midnight, ain't we?"
"Yes," I said.
"You guys're forgetting one thing," Dean said. "I know Coffey's been pretty quiet ever since he came on
the block, doesn't do much but lay there on his bunk and leak from the eyes, but he's a murderer. Also,
he's huge. If he decided he wanted to escape out of the back of Harry's truck, the only way we could stop
him would be to shoot him dead. And a guy like that would take a lot of killing, even with a .45. Suppose
we weren't able to put him down? And suppose he killed someone else? I'd hate losing my job, and I'd
hate going to jail - I got a wife and kids depending on me to put bread in their mouths - but I don't think
I'd hate either of those things near as much as having another dead little girl on my conscience."
"That won't happen," I said.
"How in God's name can you be so sure of that?"
I didn't answer. I didn't know just how to begin. I had known this would come up, of course I did, but I
still didn't know how to start telling them what I knew. Brutal helped me.
"You don't think he did it, do you, Paul?" He looked incredulous. "You think that big lug is innocent."
"I'm positive he's innocent," I said.
"How in the name of Jesus can you be?"
"There are two things," I said. "One of them is my shoe." I leaned forward over the table and began
talking.

The Green Mile
Part Five:
Night Journey
1.
Mr. H. G. Wells once wrote a story about a man who invented a time machine, and I have discovered
that, in the writing of these memoirs, I have created my own time machine. Unlike Wells's, it can only
travel into the past - back to 1932, as a matter of fact, when I was the bull-goose screw in E Block of
Cold Mountain State Penitentiary - but it's eerily efficient, for all that. Still, this time machine reminds
me of the old Ford I had in those days: you could be sure that it would start eventually, but you neverknew if a turn of the key would be enough to fire the motor, or if you were going to have to get out and
crank until your arm practically fell off.
I've had a lot of easy starts since I started telling the story of John Coffey, but yesterday I had to crank. I
think it was because I'd gotten to Delacroix's execution, and part of my mind didn't want to have to relive
that. It was a bad death, a terrible death, and it happened the way it did because of Percy Wetmore, a
young man who loved to comb his hair but couldn't stand to be laughed at - not even by a half bald little
Frenchman who was never going to see another Christmas.
As with most dirty jobs, however, the hardest part is just getting started. It doesn't matter to an engine
whether you use the key or have to crank; once you get it going, it'll usually run just as sweet either way.
That's how it worked for me yesterday. At first the words came in little bursts of phrasing, then in whole
sentences, then in a torrent. Writing is a special and rather terrifying form of remembrance, I've
discovered - there is a totality to it that seems almost like rape. Perhaps I only feel that way because I've
become a very old man (a thing that happened behind my own back, I sometimes feel), but I don't think
so. I believe that the combination of pencil and memory creates a kind of practical magic, and magic is
dangerous. As a man who knew John Coffey and saw what he could do - to mice and to men - l feel very
qualified to say that.
Magic is dangerous.
In any case, I wrote all day yesterday, the words simply flooding out of me, the sunroom of this glorified
old folks' home gone, replaced by the storage room at the end of the Green Mile where so many of my
problem children took their last sit-me-downs and the bottom of the stairs which led to the tunnel under
the road. That was where Dean and Harry and Brutal and I confronted Percy Wetmore over Eduard
Delacroix's smoking body and made Percy renew his promise to put in for transfer to the Briar Ridge
state mental facility.
There are always fresh flowers in the sunroom, but by noon yesterday all I could smell was the noxious
aroma of the dead man's cooked flesh. The sound of the power mower on the lawn down below had been
replaced by the hollow plink of dripping water as it seeped slowly through the tunnel's curved roof. The
trip was on. I had travelled back to 1932, in soul and mind, if not body.
I skipped lunch, wrote until four o'clock or so, and when I finally put my pencil down, my hand was
aching. I walked slowly down to the end of the second-floor corridor. There's a window there that looks
out on the employee parking lot. Brad Dolan, the orderly who reminds me of Percy - and the one who is
altogether too curious about where I go and what I do on my walks - drives an old Chevrolet with a
bumper sticker that says I HAVE SEEN GOD AND HIS NAME IS NEWT. It was gone; Brad's shift was
over and he'd taken himself off to whatever garden spot he calls home. I envision an Airstream trailer
with Hustler gatefolds Scotch-taped to the walls and Dixie Beer cans in the corners.
I went out through the kitchen, where dinner preparations were getting started. "What you got in that bag,
Mr. Edgecombe?" Norton asked me.
"It's an empty bottle," I said. "I've discovered the Fountain of Youth down there in the woods. I pop
down every afternoon about this time and draw a little. I drink it at bedtime. Good stuff, I can tell you."
"May be keepin you young," said George, the other cook, "but it ain't doin shit for your looks.-"We all had a laugh at that, and I went out. I found myself looking around for Dolan even though his car
was gone, called myself a chump for letting him get so far under my skin, and crossed the croquet course.
Beyond it is a scraggy little putting green that looks ever so much nicer in the Georgia Pines brochures,
and beyond that is a path that winds into the little copse of woods east of the nursing home. There are a
couple of old sheds along this path, neither of them used for anything these days. At the second, which
stands close to the high stone wall between the Georgia Pines grounds and Georgia Highway 47, I went
in and stayed for a little while.
I ate a good dinner that night, watched a little TV, and went to bed early. On many nights I'll wake up
and creep back down to the TV room, where I watch old movies on the American Movie Channel. Not
last night, though; last night I slept like a stone, and with none of the dreams that have so haunted me
since I started my adventures in literature. All that writing must have worn me out; I'm not as young as I
used to be, you know.
When I woke and saw that the patch of sun which usually lies on the floor at six in the morning had made
it all the way up to the foot of my bed, I hit the deck in a hurry, so alarmed I hardly noticed the arthritic
flare of pain in my hips and knees and ankles. I dressed as fast as I could, then hurried down the hall to
the window that overlooks the employees' parking lot, hoping the slot where Dolan parks his old
Chevrolet would still be empty. Sometimes he's as much as half an hour late -
No such luck. The car was there, gleaming rustily in the morning sun. Because Mr. Brad Dolan has
something to arrive on time for these days, doesn't he? Yes. Old Paulie Edgecombe goes somewhere in
the early mornings, old Paulie Edgecombe is up to something, and Mr. Brad Dolan intends to find out
what it is. What do you do down there, Paulie? Tell me. He would likely be watching for me already. It
would be smart to stay right where I was ... except I couldn't.
"Paul?"
I turned around so fast I almost fell down. It was my friend Elaine Connelly. Her eyes widened and she
put out her hands, as if to catch me. Lucky for her I caught my balance; Elaine's arthritis is terrible, and I
probably would have broken her in two like a dry stick if I'd fallen into her arms. Romance doesn't die
when you pass into the strange country that lies beyond eighty, but you can forget the Cone with the
Wind crap.
"I'm sorry," she said. "I didn't mean to startle you."
"That's all right," I said, and gave her a feeble smile. "It's a better wake-up than a faceful of cold water. I
should hire you to do it every morning."
"You were looking for his car, weren't you? Dolan's car."
There was no sense kidding her about it, so I nodded. "I wish I could be sure he's over in the west wing.
I'd like to slip out for a little while, but I don't want him to see me."
She smiled - a ghost of the teasing imp's smile she must have had as a girl. "Nosy bastard, isn't he?"
"Yes."
"He's not in the west wing, either. I've already been down to breakfast, sleepyhead, and I can tell you
where he is, because I peeked. He's in the kitchen."I looked at her, dismayed. I had known Dolan was curious, but not how curious.
"Can you put your morning walk off?" Elaine asked.
I thought about it. "I could, I suppose, but..."
"You shouldn't."
"No. I shouldn't."
Now, I thought, she'll ask me where I go, what I have to do down in those woods that's so damned
important.
But she didn't. Instead she gave me that imp's smile again. It looked strange and absolutely wonderful on
her too-gaunt, pain-haunted face. "Do you know Mr. Howland?" she asked."Sure," I said, although I didn't see him much; he was in the west wing, which at Georgia Pines was
almost like a neighboring country. "Why?"
"Do you know what's special about him?"
I shook my head.
"Mr. Howland," Elaine said, smiling more widely than ever, "is one of only five residents left at Georgia
Pines who have permission to smoke. That's because he was a resident before the rules changed."
A grandfather clause, I thought. And what place was more fitted for one than an old-age home?
She reached into the pocket of her blue-and-white-striped dress and pulled two items partway out: a
cigarette and a book of matches. "Thief of green, thief red," she sang in a lilting, funny voice. "Little
Ellie's going to wet the bed."
"Elaine, what - "
"Walk an old girl downstairs," she said, putting the cigarette and matches back into her pocket and taking
my arm in one of her gnarled hands. We began to walk back down the hall. As we did, I decided to give
up and put myself in her hands. She was old and brittle, but not stupid.As we went down, walking with the glassy care of the relics we have now become, Elaine said: "Wait at
the foot. I'm going over to the west wing, to the hall toilet there. You know the one I mean, don't you?"
"Yes," I said. "The one just outside the spa. But why?"
"I haven't had a cigarette in over fifteen years," she said, "but I feel like one this morning. I don't know
how many puffs it'll take to set off the smoke detector in there, but I intend to find out."
I looked at her with dawning admiration, thinking how much she reminded me of my wife - Jan might
have done exactly the same thing. Elaine looked back at me, smiling her saucy imp's smile. I cupped my
hand around the back of her lovely long neck, drew her face to mine, and kissed her mouth lightly. "I
love you, Ellie," I said.
"Oooh, such big talk," she said, but I could tell she was pleased."What about Chuck Howland?" I asked. "Is he going to get in trouble?"
"No, because he's in the TV room, watching Good Morning America with about two dozen other folks.
And I'm going to make myself scarce as soon as the smoke detector turns on the west-wing fire alarm."
"Don't you fall down and hurt yourself, woman. I'd never forgive myself if - "
"Oh, stop your fussing," she said, and this time she kissed me. Love among the ruins. It probably sounds
funny to some of you and grotesque to the rest of you, but I'll tell you something, my friend: weird love's
better than no love at all.
I watched her walk away, moving slowly and stiffly (but she will only use a cane on wet days, and only
then if the pain is terrible; it's one of her vanities), and waited. Five minutes went by, then ten, and just as
I was deciding she had either lost her courage or discovered that the battery of the smoke detector in the
toilet was dead, the fire alarm went off in the west wing with a loud, buzzing burr.
I started toward the kitchen at once, but slowly - there was no reason to hurry until I was sure Dolan was
out of my way. A gaggle of old folks, most still in their robes, came out of the TV room (here it's called
the Resource Center; now that's grotesque) to see what was going on. Chuck Howland was among them,
I was happy to see.
"Edgecombe!" Kent Avery rasped, hanging onto his walker with one hand and yanking obsessively at the
crotch of his pajama pants with the other. "Real alarm or just another falsie? What do you think?"
"No way of knowing, I guess," I said.
Just about then three orderlies went trotting past, all headed for the west wing, yelling at the folks
clustered around the TV-room door to go outside and wait for the all-clear. The third in line was Brad
Dolan. He didn't even look at me as he went past, a fact that pleased me to no end. As I went on down
toward the kitchen, it occurred to me that the team of Elaine Connelly and Paul Edgecombe would
probably be a match for a dozen Brad Dolans, with half a dozen Percy Wetmores thrown in for good
measure.
The cooks in the kitchen were continuing to clear up breakfast, paying no attention to the howling fire.
alarm at all.
"Say, Mr. Edgecombe," George said. "I believe Brad Dolan been lookin for you. In fact, you just missed
him."
Lucky me, I thought. What I said out loud was that I'd probably see Mr. Dolan later. Then I asked if there
was any leftover toast lying around from breakfast.
"Sure," Norton said, "but it's stone-cold dead in the market. You runnin late this morning."
"I am," I agreed, "but I'm hungry."
"Only take a minute to make some fresh and hot," George said, reaching for the bread.
"Nope, cold will be fine," I said, and when he handed me a couple of slices (looking mystified - actually
both of them looked mystified), I hurried out the door, feeling like the boy I once was, skipping school to
go fishing with a jelly fold-over wrapped in waxed paper slipped into the front of my shirt.Outside the kitchen door I took a quick, reflexive look around for Dolan, saw nothing to alarm me, and
hurried across the croquet course and putting green, gnawing on one of my pieces of toast as I went. I
slowed a little as I entered the shelter of the woods, and as I walked down the path, I found my mind
turning to the day after Eduard Delacroix's terrible execution.
I had spoken to Hal Moores that morning, and he had told me that Melinda's brain tumor had caused her
to lapse into bouts of cursing and foul language ... what my wife had later labelled (rather tentatively; she
wasn't sure it was really the same thing) as Tourette's Syndrome. The quavering in his voice, coupled
with the memory of how John Coffey had healed both my urinary infection and the broken back of
Delacroix's pet mouse, had finally pushed me over the line that runs between just thinking about a thing
and actually doing a thing.
And there was something else. Something that had to do with John Coffey's hands, and my shoe.
So I had called the men I worked with, the men I had trusted my life to over the years - Dean Stanton,
Harry Terwilliger, Brutus Howell. They came to lunch at my house on the day after Delacroix's
execution, and they at least listened to me when I outlined my plan. Of course, they all knew that Coffey
had healed the mouse; Brutal had actually seen it. So when I suggested that another miracle might result
if we took John Coffey to Melinda Moores, they didn't outright laugh. It was Dean Stanton who raised
the most troubling question: What if John Coffey escaped while we had him out on his field-trip?
"Suppose he killed someone else?" Dean asked. "I'd hate losing my job, and I'd hate going to jail - I got a
wife and kids depending on me to put bread in their mouths - but I don't think I'd hate either of those
things near as much as having another little dead girl on my conscience."
There was silence, then, all of them looking at me, waiting to see how I'd respond. I knew everything
would change if I said what was on the tip of my tongue; we had reached a point beyond which retreat
would likely become impossible.
Except retreat, for me, at least, was already impossible. I opened my mouth and said
2.
"That won't happen."
"How in God's name can you be so sure?" Dean asked.
I didn't answer. I didn't know just how to begin. I had known this would come up, of course I had, but I
still didn't know how to start telling them what was in my head and heart. Brutal helped.
"You don't think he did it, do you, Paul?" He looked incredulous. "You think that big lug is innocent."
"I'm positive he's innocent," I said.
"How can you be?"
"There are two things," I said. "One of them is my shoe."
"Your shoe?" Brutal exclaimed. 'What has your shoe got to do with whether or not John Coffey killed
those two little girls?""I took off one of my shoes and gave it to him last night," I said. "After the execution, this was, when
things had settled back down a little. I pushed it through the bars, and he picked it up in those big hands
of his. I told him to tie it. I had to make sure, you see, because all our problem children normally wear is
slippers - a man who really wants to commit suicide can do it with shoelaces, if he's dedicated. That's
something all of us know."
They were nodding.
"He put it on his lap and got the ends of the laces crossed over all right, but then he was stuck. He said he
was pretty sure someone had showed him how to do it when he was a lad - maybe his father or maybe
one of the boyfriends his mother had after the father was gone - but he'd forgot the knack."